

Introduction 


The day's dusty duty has been done, the last boat drawn 
up on the strand, and the mountain-sides and sea-lochs that 
fringe the western coast of Ireland are dark. But in a white- 
washed kitchen in the glen the peat-fire glows like a berry, 
and the cricket-'the cock of the ashes'-sings. And the 
tangle of Gaelic voices singles out as the Story-teller spreads 
his fingers for attention and begins his tale. It could well 
be a wonder-tale that crossed the roads of Europe from 
the East a thousand years ago; passing from mouth to 
mouth and from generation to generation till at last it 
comes to rest in this lamp-lit room at the edge of the 
Atlantic. For an hour or t,vo the listening farmers and fisher- 
men will forget their bleak existence; the intoxicating talk 
turns them into kings and playboys of the western world. 
'And tell me,' said a Kerryman, 'if you had no picture- 
house, no playhouse, no cunning radio or television at the 
tips of your fingers, no amusement whatever from head to 
head of the week except what was painted on the square 
above a cottage half-door (the highest excitement being the 
coming and going of cloud-caps on a mountain) wouldn't 
you too be hungry for the lovely dovetailed talk?' 
The Gaelic story-tellers are the caretakers of a peasant 
tradition, the carriers of an oral culture, that once covered 
the Atlantic fringe of Europe. They belong to antiquity, to 
a Europe that had no books, no radio, no cinema or tele- 
vision, a Europe whose only entertainment was the parish 
lore or the winter-night's tale told by a passing traveller. 
Unlettered but not unlearned, they are the inheritors of a 
considerable art. Usually they are old men, for it is the old 
who think long and sleep lightly and have the fabulous 



VI 11 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


memories. But the story-tellers are a vanishing race for they 
have lost their audience and the flow of words comes thin 
and seldom now. The radio has taken away their voices 
just as the printed page has taken over their memories, and 
the pictures that once "vere seen in a glowing peat-fire are 
seen more readily on the picture-screen today. The world 
has widened and the imagination of man has dwindled. For 
it is good communications, not evil ones, that corrupt good 
manners and local mores, and the better the roads that lead 
into the glen the quicker the old language, the old customs, 
the old stories and poetry, run out of it. I recall going to 
visit a Gaelic story-teller who was reputed to be the only 
man left in his district who could tell in the traditional 
manner The King of Ireland's Son, a tale that took him two 
weeks of nights in the telling. He was not at home; I found 
him in his enemy's house, the local cinema, watching a 
Wild Western picture. 
'Those old story-tellers had extraordinary memories,' said 
an elderly schoolmaster to me. 'They could remember a 
story, even if it were as long as a book, after hearing it once. 
That was the important thing, for they could neither read 
nor write. There was one particular house for story-telling 
in our district and my father went every second night and 
myself along with him. We had a great respect for emulation 
then. I was fifteen at the time, and whether in Gaelic or 
English I'd be delighted with the fairy-stories. Going home 
at night I'd be thinking of them, and if a widowed leaf 
dropped from a holly-bush I'd leap a foot with the fright. 
But the young people are not interested now.' Fairy tales, 
ghost stories, and similar short narrative pieces (seanchas 1 ) 


1 Seanchaí is applied as a rule to a person, man or \\Toman, who makes 
a speciality of local tales, family sagas or genealogies, social-historical 
tradition and the like, and can recount many tales of a short realistic 
type about fairies, ghosts, and other supernatural beings (J. H. Delargy). 



Introduction 


IX 


are recounted by both men and women. But the telling of 
the great Finn-tales (fianalocht) or hero-stories is traditionally 
restricted to men; 'A woman fianal or a crowing hen!' runs 
the proverb. And the long and popular folk-tales (sean- 
sgéalta) are also mainly preserved by men. There have been 
notable exceptions to this rule. From Peig Sayers, 'the 
Queen of Gaelic story-tellers', one collector, Seósamh Ó 
Dálaigh, obtained 375 tales, of which forty were long folk- 
tales: forty folk-songs were also taken down from her dictation. 
Peig Sayers (1873-1958), was born in the parish of 
Dunquin at the western end of the Dingle peninsula in the 
county of Kerry. In Kerry they say that the gift of poetry 
passes from father to daughter, the gift of story from father 
to son. But Peig, like her brothers, Pádraig and Seán, had 
the stories from her father, 'and I don't think', she said to me, 


that his master in story-telling was in Kerry at the time. 
It was a great pity that these gadgets and horns and 
machines weren't there then to take down his speech and 
conversation, but alas! they weren't. I remember well the 
night he was telling the story of The Red Ox. He was ninety- 
eight years old that night but was very lively and healthy. 
While he ,.vas at the story, telling it to us at the fireside, he 
stopped in the middle of it and \vasn't able to say another 
word for a while. 
'You're near death, father,' said I. 
'I'm not,' said he. 
'Indeed you are,' I replied. 'Death is coming for you. 
You never went astray in a story, as long as there's memory 
in my head, until tonight. You're finished!' 
'Death hasn't left Cork yet to come for me, my girl!' 
said he. But it had. For he wasn't able to finish out the end 
of the story, and he lived only nine days after that. He had 
done a good deal to entertain the young boys-and the old 
too-vvho gathered round him to hear him. That was the 
chief pastime then, story-telling and talking about old times. 
But that's not the way no,.v. They no longer care for stories, 
and the stories would have died out altogether, for the 



x An Old Woman's Reflections 
young people weren't ready to pick them up. But no,v, 
thank God, there's a gadget for taking them down, if there 
were any story-tellers left, but there aren't. For the old 
Gaels are dead and the new generations rising up don't 
know Irish well. That's a great pity because Irish is a noble 
and a precious language. But it is coming to life and re- 
gaining strength. And it is short, with God's help, until it 
will be blossoming again as it was in olden times by the 
old people who have left us. May God give eternal life to 
their souls and to our own souls when we seek it, Amen! 


Peig married into a neighbouring island, the Great 
Blasket, where she spent the greater part of her life. 'I never 
met my husband till the day I married him,' she told me, 
'but it was a love-match till the day he died. And why 
shouldn't it, for he was a fine big man.' Peig herself was a 
fine big woman. Peig Mhór (Big Peg) she was commonly 
called. 'Big Peig', wrote Robin Flower in his devoted book, 
The UTestern Island, 'is one of the finest speakers in the 
Island; she has so clean and finished a style of speech that 
you can follow all the nicest articulations of the language 
on her lips without any effort; she is a natural orator, with 
so keen a sense of the turn of phrase and the lifting rhythm 
appropriate to Irish that her words could be written down 
as they leave her lips, and they would have the effect of 
literature with no savour of the artificiality of composition.' 
Students and scholars of the Irish language came from far 
and wide to visit her and she received them with natural 
country dignity. 'I saw her being presented with a mush- 
room one day,' a neighbour told me, 'and she accepted it 
as if she had been presented with a gold cup.' Where life 
in general is limited and monotonous its least detail is 
exalted into drama; islanders who live in the shapeless 
shadow of poverty will always put a pattern of dignity and 
ceremony on it in order to endure and redeem their 
existence. 



Introduction 


Xl 


The Great Blasket Island lies three stormy miles from the 
mainland of Kerry. On this sea-birds' ledge of Europe, 
where the Atlantic waves rise up like swallows into the lofts 
of air, a hardy community of people kept a bare foothold 
for centuries. It was a slackening hold when I saw it fifteen 
years ago, for the island was plainly exhausted and the girls 
from the mainland would no longer marry into it; only 
fifty people were left on it. The few green fields ring- 
worming the rough hairy hillside, the old man holding on 
to the tail of his donkey as it climbed the mountainy path, 
the old woman hunkered at her cottage door, her face 
sunk in her hands, the absence of children playing, gave 
the place an air of approaching dereliction. Yet this small 
island had been a crowded nest of Gaelic life and story- 
telling, and had contributed several minor classics to the 
world of books: The Islandman, by Tomás 6 Crohan; 
Twenty Tears Agrowing, by Maurice O'Sullivan; and now 
Peig's own Reflections. Seen on a summer's day from the 
cliff at Dunquin no prospect could be more pleasing: the 
sudden eye-openers of sunlight on the vast face of the 
Atlantic; the gannets flashing like far-off bits of mirror; 
the islands shading off as if shy of being seen; a perpetual 
flutter of wind, like paper tearing at one's ears. But in 
winter the Great Blasket is a bleak black place, and the 
islanders were often marooned by storm for three weeks at 
a time. The only access to the island at any time is by 
curragh, a fifteen-foot canoe (naomhóg) of lath and tarred 
canvas made for three rowers, with the ubiquitous sacred 
medal and bottle of holy water tied to the prow. Buoyant 
and biddable, it is the only boat that can live in these 
waters and land on this wild coast. But it is seldom that 
anyone lands on the Great Blasket now, for the island is 
qui te deserted. 
Remote in time as in space, these Gaelic-speaking regions 



.. 
XII 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


of the West have a medieval simplicity. The people are 
close to earth and to each other. Every field-stone has been 
hand-turned a thousand times and every turn of a man's 
mind is kno\vn. And Heaven, too, is close to earth here. 
It lies, eXplained an old Kerrywoman, in the south-west, 
'a foot-and-a-half above the height of a man', as homely 
and intimate today as it "vas to the Gaelic poet of the 
11iddle Ages: 


I would like to have the men of Heaven 
In my own house; 
With vats of good cheer 
Laid out for them. 


I would like to have the three Marys, 
Their fame is so great. 
I would like people 
From every corner of Heaven. 


I would like them to be cheerful 
In their drinking, 
I would like to have] esus, too, 
Here amongst them. 


I would like a great lake of beer 
For the King of Kings. 
I would like to be watching Heaven's family 
Drinking it through all eternity. 
'I wish I had the ability to describe the scene in Peig 
Sayers's home in Dunquin on a winter's n.ight when the 
stage was set for the seanchaí', writes Seósamh Ó Dálaigh 
to me. 'The evening meal was over, the day's work done, 
the family rosary finished. On the hearth glowed a small 
peat-fire and on the side-wall an oil-lamp gave a dim light. 
Peig dominated the scene, seated on a low chair right in 
front of the fire (this was most unusual in the locality; 
bean a' ti, the woman of the house, usually seated herself 



Introduction 


XUl 


at the side) and smoking her pipe. Mícheál her brother- 
in-law sat with his vamps2 to the fire at one side of her and 
Mike her son at the other. When the visitors arrived (for 
all gathered to the Sayers house when Peig was there, to 
listen to her from supper-time till midnight) the chairs were 
moved back and the circle increased. News was swopped, 
and the news often gave the lead for the night's subject, 
death, fairies, weather, crops.' All was grist to the mill, the 
sayings of the dead and the doings of the living, and Peig, 
as she warmed to her subject, would illustrate it richly from 
her repertoire of verse, proverb, and story. Often her 
thoughts would turn to sad topics; she might tell, for 
instance, of the bitter day when the body of her son Tom 
was brought home, his head so battered by the cruel rocks 
he had fallen on from the cliff that his corpse was not 
presentable to the public. So Peig, with breaking heart, had 
gathered her courage together and with motherly hands had 
stroked and coaxed the damaged skull into shape. 'It was 
difficul t,' she would say; and then, with a flick of the shaw I 
she wore, she would invoke the name of the Blessed Virgin, 
saying 'Let everyone carry his cross.' 'I never heard any- 
thing so moving in my life,' a Kerryman confessed to me, 
'as Peig Sayers reciting a lament of the Virgin Mary for 
her Son, her face and voice getting more and more sorrowful. 
I came out of the house and I didn't know where I was.' 
Great artist and wise woman that she was, Peig "vould at 
once switch from gravity to gaiety, for she was a light- 
hearted woman, and her changes of mood and face were 
like the changes of running water. As she talked her hands 
would be working too; a little clap of the palms to cap a 
phrase, a flash of the thumb over her shoulder to mark a 
mystery, a hand hushed to mouth for mischief or whispered 
secrecy. 'When the fun is at its height it is time to go', runs 
2 Stockinged feet. 



XIV 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


the Irish proverb; and \vhen visitors went each night Peig 
would draw the ashes over the peat-embers to preserve the 
fire till morning, reciting her customary prayer: 'I preserve 
the fire as Christ preserves all. Brigid at the two ends of the 
house, and Mary in the centre. The three angels and 
the three apostles who are highest in the Kingdom of Grace, 
guarding this house and its contents until day.' 
'It's hard to be growing old,' said Peig when I said good- 
bye to her in Dingle, 'but,' she added with a grin, 'I'll be 
talking after my death, my good gentleman.' So she will, 
for as the proverb says, 
Is buaine port ná glór na n-éan 
Is buaine focal ná toice an tsael 
'A tune is more lasting than the song of the birds, and a 
word more lasting than the wealth of the world.' 
W. R. RODGERS 



CHAPTER ONE 


A Pity how Youth goes 


My sorrow, isn't it many a twist life does! Isn't Youth fine! 
-but alas! she cannot be held always! She slips away as 
the water slips away from the sand of the shore. A person 
falls into age unknown to himself. I think there are no two 
jewels more valuable than Youth and Health. There's me 
now, sat in a heap on a green sward beside the house, 
reflecting and musing on the days of my youth. Och! wasn't 
it I ,vas agile and light then! Small thought I had that I'd 
ever be a worn old one like this! On that fine harvest 
evening long ago, coming from Dingle, when I sat on the 
Jackdaw's Rock to rest and looking around me and west 
at the islands, little did I think that 'twas on that Big 
Island I'd have to spend my life! But, of course, if a person 
kne,v, he could alter things, because I know now what hard- 
ship followed me. My sharp grief! it's too late today, but 
thank God life is nearly spent for me, as over three score 
years of it have gone by me and for not long more will I 
be a safe mooring, hard as I may try. 
I'm looking from me out on the sea, ,vhich is quiet and 
shining. Many a tide went north and from the north in 
eighteen years and forty since a boat from Dunquin was 
drowned-be safe where it's told! Its memory is live in my 
head, though I was only six years old that time. It was an 
awful day. The morning was calm and the Dunquin people 
decided to go to the Small Island to cut seaweed. There 
wasn't a breeze from the sky and the sea was quite calm; 
and a person would say it was far from treachery or damage. 
There were eight men in each boat, strong courageous men. 



2 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


My own father and my t,vo brothers, Patrick and John, 
v/ere in the boat Tinte,l may God have mercy on their 
souls! The three boats were floating at the Cliff of the Sticks 
when some thought came into the mind of Maurice Kane- 
he ,vas the captain on the Tinte-and he wouldn't be 
pleased unless my brother John who was in the Ballinahovv 
boat came with him. Because he was a tough hard man he'd 
rather have him in the boat than Mister Long. In that mind 
he put Mister Long out of the boat and took my brother, 
John, in his own boat with him. But that didn't stop Mister 
Long from going to cut seaweed that day. The poor man 
went in my brother's place in the other boat. Then the 
three boats were let out to sea together. When they reached 
the small island the people of the (big) island were there 
before them sharply cutting seaweed, a man with a knife, 
a man with a sickle, unclad save for flannel breeches. 
Every man was at his work and believe me a long time 
vvasn't spent when the boats were full. When the tide turned 
to flow, and their boats full, the Bocry-that was the Ballina- 
how boat-was in the lead but ,vhen the tide strengthened, 
and the north-east wind, the water started to come into the 
boat because it was too full of seaweed. Then they started 
to throw the seaweed overboard. But my sharp grief! A 
rough tidal wave arose and ran in on them. The boat 
coming behind them on her course saw their drowning 
danger and started to throw their seaweed overboard 
quickly. It was the Tinte boat that caught them up first, 
the boat my father was in but alas! the Body was there 
before them, her keel upwards and all the crew drowned 
save one couple who managed to catch hold of the keel. 
They took the couple aboard and brought them to the Cliff 
of the Sticks. It was a sorrowful day because there wasn't a 


1 'Maurice the Tent' was the captain's nickname because it was in a 
tent or cabin he lived. 



A Pity how Touth goes 


3 


man or a woman who would be able who wasn't heading 
for the harbour with the thousand cries of grief. I and other 
children were playing Blind Man's Buff when Kate, my 
brother's wife came, and she frightened. 
'Take care of Paddy, asthoreen,' she said-that's the 
older son she had who was starting to walk. 
'Where will yourself go?' said I. 
'Musha, I don't know where I'll go now,' she said and 
she went from me, the old track west and fright in her. 
A woman and another woman followed after her. 
When my mother rose out, because of not having good 
hearing, she didn't know what had happened. 
'Where are those women to the west all going?' she said. 
'God with us!' said Kate Jim-it was she answered- 
'The Tinte boat is drowned and Pat and John in under her.' 
The poor child didn't understand it and no less did she 
know which boat was drowned. 
As soon as my mother heard that speech she let an awful 
cry out of her that could be heard equally well all over the 
parish. She couldn't go anywhere, but she went up on the 
top of the wall with every second cry for Pat and John. It 
wasn't my father she was lamenting, but her two sons. She 
wasn't long there, however, when she became dizzy and 
away with her across the wall in to a bush of briars and 
nettles. That's where the racket was! I had every screech 
about horror, unable to help her, but a woman I didn't 
know came, Kate Malone, who had come home from 
America a while before that. When she heard me screeching 
she came to where my mother had fallen, took her up gently 
and went on to give her back sense and reason. She told 
her it wasn't the Tinte boat that was drowned at all, but 
the Ballinahow boat and that Pat and John were safe. 
And \vith that four came from west the big gate. '0, 
Kate,' says she, 'ther
 comes my Pat.' 


B 



4 An Old Woman's Reflections 
She was right. He was there, surely, himself and John 
and my father and Owen Brown. 
It was a sorrowful day in Dunquin. There were five 
widows and their orphans weeping bitterly. 



CHAPTER TWO 


St. Kathleen's Pilgrimage,. an Old 
Woman from Ventry,. and Other Matters 


1 am going back now on the little road of thoughts. A 
holiday in Ventry parish is St. Kathleen's day. Many people 
do the pilgrimage of the church in that blessed graveyard 
,,,,here the remains of Kathleen are buried, awaiting the 
resurrection. There is nobody who is to be buried in that 
graveyard who doesn't strive to make confession and receive 
Communion and hear Mass on the morning of that day, 
in honour of St. Kathleen. 
Drawing on forty years ago, 1 was doing the pilgrimage. 
The memory of that day is still alive in my head. 1 see, 1 
think, the crowds moving down the long road heading for 
the graveyard. Some of them were unwell but there was 
strong hope alight in their hearts that they would be well 
when returning, by the Grace of God and St. Kathleen. 
Among them was an aged old woman from Ventry parish, 
and we both laid into talk with each other. Many an 
interesting thing she told me about and it was 1 gave sharp 
ear to that old woman. She said she remembered a big bird 
in the likeness of a swan being seen on the gable of the 
church and that people were saying that it was St. Kathleen 
herself in the likeness of a swan was being seen there. 
'Did you see her yourself?' said I. 
'I saw her,' said she, 'over there in the window of the 
old chapel.' 
'Was it day-time?' said I. 
'It wasn't, asthore,' said she. 'We used to do the 



6 An Old Woman's Reflections 
pilgrimage long before day at that time. My mother was with 
me, may God have mercy on her soul, the poor \\Toman.' 
'It was the early rising that caused it and the imagination 
of the eyes,' said I, and I pretended to be very unbelieving 
al together. 
'No, my pet,' said she, 'because I'm not the first person 
ever to see her, but nobody saw her since the first "souper"! 
was sent to the graveyard.' 
'I suppose,' said I again, moving her for talking, 'that 
you remember a lot?' 
'Musha, my treasure,' said she, 'I used to, but I never 
had but a waxen head and any accuracy it ever had it is 
scarce now with it. The hardship of life did its share of the 
work. You've only to look at my forehead-the picture is 
there to be seen'-and she turned to me so suddenly that 
she startled me. 
We were drawing nigh the graveyard by that time and 
the aged woman was very quiet. As soon as we got to the 
church gate I spoke to her, but she didn't answer me. 'Tis 
how she moved her head at me to let me know she was 
praying. When she had her prayer finished I told her to 
teach me that little prayer she was saying to herself. 
'Yes,' she said, 'never go by a graveyard "\vithout saying 
it with a clean heart.' 
'I will do my best,' said I, 'but say the words.' 
'God salute you, 0 true ones of Christ who are lying in 
this graveyard awaiting resurrection! He who suffered death 
for your sake, may he give glorious resurrection to your 
souls! ' 
'Amen,' said I. 'That's a beautiful wish, 0 aged woman, 
and I have it now and I'll do my best to say it every time 
I pass a graveyard.' 


1 'Souper'-the one who turned his religion for soup in the famine 
years. 



St. Kathleen's Pilgrimage 


7 


'Do, my treasure,' said she, 'because soon we will all be 
in need of that wish. But you have the youth still, and long 
may you! Have you got the prayer they say in honour of 
Kathleen, the saint of the pilgrimage?' 
'No,' I said, 'because there's neither prayer nor creed 
correct with the people now compared with those who were 
there in your youth.' 
'Listen to me now,' said she, 'till I say it for you' and 
she started this way: 
May God and Mary salute you, St. Kathleen, 
And as they salute you I salute you. 
It's to you I came, complaining my pain 
And asking my cure in God's account 
God and Mary and you to ease it for me! 
'By my hands, aged woman, that prayer is nice too and 
I'll treasure it to me.' 
'Do,' said she, 'maybe the day would come yet when you 
might use it. Let us start now and do the pilgrimage in the 
name of God,' said she. 
At that time there were many other people in small 
parties here and there about the graveyard, each with his 
rosary beads in hand praying fervently. There was none of 
them but had some relative stretched among the thousands 
in the graveyard and that made the praying far more 
SIncere. 
We started at the bottom of the graveyard and had to go 
around it ten times and say a decade of the Rosary on each 
round and then go on our knees at the Cross at the head of 
the graveyard and say five decades. 
Myself and the old woman and two other women who 
were not too old were on our knees. I was watching the old 
woman keenly. Her two eyes were closed hard and the 
beads busy in her fingers and she praying. As soon as we 
were ready she stood up. 



8 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


'Yes,' she said, 'we have that much done, thank God, 
and may it be for our good! But I am exhausted by the 
walking and the age.' 
'You weren't like that one time, Kate,' said I. 
'I wasn't, island-woman,' said she. 'It was I had the 
agility, though I can easily deny that today. A good run 
doesn't stay with the steed for ever. Don't you see that 
many a brave man and strong tough woman are stretched 
there on their backs growing grass, may God grant eternal 
rest to their souls!' 
'Amen!' said I. 
'Do you see that little tomb beside us?' 
'I do,' said I. 
'The one I'm going to talk about is lying quietly under 
that flagstone. When I look at the grave it makes me 
meditate. Isn't it funny with an old person who gets upset 
by small things! And the proverb didn't leave much out, 
because it says the old person is a child twice. It's well I 
knew the person who is asleep in it.' 
'And who is he, Kate?' said I, eager to hear the story 
concerning him. 
'Pats the Smith was his name,' said she, 'and 'tis how he 
was alvvays a servant with a gentlewoman 2 living in Dingle. 
He was a small low-sized stocky lad with black hair and 
pale yellow complexion on him and for that reason not 
much sought by the love of young women. But the gentle- 
woman wanted to see him well settled, because he was in 
her service for long years. She herself was master of all the 
land from Barque Point to Slea Head. She had the Bay 
Farm under lease and often she spent some of her time there. 
She had boys and girls in her employ there and frequently 
many of them were not too grateful to her. She had another 
house in Glenfawn they called the Big House. She had 
2 Betty Rice-she is mentioned in The Islanrlman. 



St. Kathleen's Pilgrimage 


9 


servants and workers there too. Pats the Smith was the 
principal at the Big House and it's under his hand every- 
thing was. The gentlewoman had great trust in him and a 
liking for him. She had planned to present the Big House 
and all the land that went with it to him if he would marry 
a young woman that she had chosen for him. But the young 
woman didn't like him at all. She scorned Pats the Smith 
and the Big House. Her nose would bleed if she met him! 
The women of the parish faulted him so why shouldn't she? 
He was yellow, he didn't walk nicely, he was stoop- 
shouldered-there was no fault in the world but he had. 
There was no good the gentlewoman being at her. If she 
were to present her whole estate she'd never give in to 
marry him. 
'Shrove came. And the young woman's father wanted to 
make a match for her with another man. But when the 
gentlewoman heard that news she called to her a band of 
her own tenant men and told them what she had planned. 
There was no use in their refusing her because oppression 
was too strict on them. She told them to hide in some 
place and help Pats the Smith to abduct the young 
woman. 
, "Herself and her father are gone to Dingle today making 
a match," she said, "and it's a bold deed for them to oppose 
me. But let it not go with them! Let me be obeyed. 
Let their step be watched, and we'll see that we'll win 
in the end," and she stood before them as straight as a 
soldier. 
'The Saturday to come the young girl and her father and 
mother were in Dingle and myself and two other girls with 
them. My woe! It's little I expected the enemy was so near 
us. Ventry strand a lot of people used to go that time, 
because there was a short-cut there. It was the strand we 
took too coming home. Our enemy was in hiding at Bun 



10 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


an Teampaill awaiting us. Pats the Smith with a wild strong 
horse was a bit away from the rest. Nobody could see them 
because the night was too dark. As soon as we came to 
Bun an Teampaill the tail of the cart was suddenly leant upon 
and we were thrown out on the sand. No quicker that than 
two men tied up the young woman in the dark and carried 
her with them to where Pats the Smith was waiting and 
away with them for the Big House. I never saw a man 
without sense only Big John, the father, that night \vhen he 
saw his daughter gone. It's not home he came but un- 
harnessed the horse, jumped on its back and away to the 
barrack. The police travelled at that time of the night 
tracing and searching for the young woman and they didn't 
leave high or low, a glen or hill or mountain until they came 
to the Big House. They saw a light there and made for it 
and 'tis how she was there before them. 
, "Will you come home or will you stay there?" said the 
father to her. 
, "I'll go home, without doubt," said she. 
, "If you'd do what I say, young one," said the gentle- 
woman, for she was there too, "you'd stay where you are. 
There would be drink and music in your kitchen to the 
end-day of your life and no sweat on your brow. Go novv 
and you'll regret it." 
, "0 gentlewoman," said she, "were you to give me the 
whole district I couldn't promise you that I'd marry Pats 
the Smith." 
, "All good!" said the gentlewoman. 
, "And will be bad!" said the girl's father, answering her 
out. "I must have satisfaction." 
'''What satisfaction do you want?" said the gentle- 
woman. 
, "I'll put to the law those who wronged me!" said he. 
, "I t' s no good for you," said she. 



St. Kathleen's Pilgrimage 


II 


, "I'll lose to the calf in the field with them," said he. 
, "I'll lose to the shoe on my foot with them," said she, 
and she hit a kick on the ground. "Go now," said she, "and 
if he's to be without a wife for ever he won't have you." 
'A little while after that Pats the Smith went to America. 
Shame wouldn't allow him to stay here because of this 
mistake. My poor fellow spent all his life working hard and 
when he came home his heart was broken and it wasn't 
long until he died. He's buried in that grave there, and the 
gentlewoman is in the grave nearest to him.' 
'Is that the Rices' grave?' said I. 
'I tis, asthore,' said she. 'Though great to speak of awhile, 
there's none of their signs today but that flagstone you see 
on the grave. They and the Trents and the Fitzgeralds were 
the proudest and most spoken-of in west Kerry in their time. 
But not many of them lived after the foreigners' crooked 
treachery. 'Tis how Rice was hanged, the father of the 
gentle\voman, and his son. The foreign robbers gave the 
same treatment to the Trents, save for one youth of that 
noble family who succeeded in escaping on a race-horse his 
father had. The red army was after him. They came up 
with him at Ballymore. He was caught. The poor lad was 
in a fix, but the grey horse was good and he was a choice 
rider. The blood was noble-it stirred and flowed faster 
than usual. He turned his head backwards, on the grey 
mare's back-he had nothing to see but the foreign 
arm.y. 
, "Yes, little horse," said he, "our time is up, but my 
dependence on you today." And then he guided the grey 
horse towards the cliff. It wasn't a sulk the grey mare put 
up when she came to the edge of the cliff: but to carry her 
four hooves with her, clean over. When the foreign robbers 
came to the edge of the cliff they had to stop. Young Trent 
was gone on the grey mare and 'twas not known where he 



12 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


had faced. He never came back to this place and that place 
is called Trent's J ump3 ever since.' 
'I don't know, 0 aged woman, was he of the Fitzgeralds 
the man they used to call "the Brush"?' said I. 
'Yes, surely,' said she, 'though it's a nickname. He was a 
musical courageous man. Robert Fitzgerald was his name 
and often he stood in the gap of danger among the men. 
He and six more of the lads were on the run and it happened 
that at that time someone related had a wedding and they 
made up their minds that they'd come to the wedding some 
time during the night. About midnight seven men strode 
the door into the wedding-house. Nobody recognized them 
because they were disguised but the man of the house had a 
suspicion they were Fenians, and welcomed them. He gave 
them food and drink and told them to have no fear, that 
his door was open to harvesters and that there was no crop 
he'd rather harvest than the one they were shaping. When 
they had enough to eat and drink Robert, "the Brush
', 
spoke to the young woman: 
, "If it would be your will to lead me to the table for a 
while?" said he. 
, "It is, and welcome," said she. 
, "Would it be your will to wet it and soap it?" said he. 
She looked at him, and all who were in looked at him. 
, "You are drunk, good man," said she, "don't you see 
that table is as clean as a silken shirt?" and the red flush 
ran up in her fair cheek. 
'''0 daughter of my soul," said Robert, "it's not of 
cleanliness I speak. The whole world knows that you came 
of the most generous and clean-hearted stock in the district. 
But do as I say. It's unlikely I'll ask you again." 
, "Do what he says!" said her father, angrily. 
3 An alternative telling of this story is in Bealoideas, vol. I (The 
Journal of the Irish Folklore Society). 



St. Kathleen's Pilgrimage 


13 


'Then she got the soft water and soap. 
, "Is that to your liking, good man?" said she and the 
blush going back bit by bit to where it was first. Robert 
rubbed his finger on it. 
, "Length on your life!" said he, "it will do." 
'He leaped up on the table and told a piper that was 
sitting in the corner to play "The Hard Summer" for him 
and he started dancing. There wasn't a gig out of anybody 
only looking at the dancer. When he had done that bout 
he leaped down from the table and stood on the door-flag 
and said: 


"I am the Sweep 
From the top of Martin Hill 
And where is the lad 
Who would use a board hard with me ?" 
'And away for ever with himself and his company.' 
'Musha, I wonder was he caught up with?' said I. 
'He wasn't,' said she. 'That treacherous enemy never 
caught him, though they were hard on his track. He suc- 
ceeded in escaping to America.' 



CHAPTER THREE 


Red Tommy and Margaret OJ Brien 


o Eagle Mountain, isn't it the stately, noble shape you 
have today on you ! You are in the tied confusion of years, 
but you show it not for your form is as pleasing as ever. 
In the days of my childhood there was no other place under 
the bright sun was brighter than you. You were but a 
stone's throw from me then but the big watery sea is be- 
tween you and me today. Wasn't it often Kate Jim and 
myself up on your top hauling the turf! We were like two 
hares that time. Your height would not trouble us. Oh! A 
delight to my heart was the smell of your heather! Often 
I'd pick a bunch of it and tie it into a fold of my dress. I'd 
never tire of sniffing the scented smell up in my nose. But 
now I've only the smell of the sea since I left you. It gives 
me peace of mind to be looking at your brow without mist. 
o king of a thousand po\vers, 'tis many a thought you 
arouse in my heart. Am I not again a little girl, whilst I'm 
looking over at you, going from bush to bush looking for 
nests down along the riverside to the rapid of Coman's 
Head! Kate Jim is with me again and we small, thro\ving 
stones into the river and the current shooting them before 
it like the bullet. A little bit up from us is Old William 
taking his rest, his slane standing in the bog and he singing 
Gait Ni Dhuibhir. 1 A bit above, there's a big cloud of smoke 
going into the sky-it's people cutting turf and the hill on 
fire around them. Down from us are the green fields of 
Dunquin and lads and horses and ploughs harrowing and 
tearing them. They are keen for the work. 
1 A patriotic song personifying Ireland as Kate O'Dwyer. 



Red Tommy and Margaret O'Brien 


15 


We are sitting near William where we have clear sight 
of sea and land. The clean sky of spring is above us and 
everyone's heart wide-open welcoming the soft, fresh spring. 
William starts to talk: 
'Musha my love God! What a gem Youth is! Every nice 
thing is in her view. The difficulty of this world never 
daunts her. She doesn't like to be under control-she likes 
to be free, without tie, always. But isn't it quickly she goes! 
Do ye see me today, children? I was once as airy as ye 
but as the skull said to the army officer: "As you are today 
I once was, and as I am today you will one day be." Ye 
will too, if ye live for it.' 
We had Youth ruling that day, but see how she slipped 
by just as William that day said she would. You have the 
same noble appearance but far from you am I and Kate Jim 
and the people cutting turf. Far and away we are scattered, 
some of us here and some of us there. Some of us are on 
the Way of Truth,2 and dIose of us who are not, small is 
the strength or humour left with us. But God is good and 
has a good Mother and He never failed the patient heart. 
What's in my mind today, and I standing here, is Red 
Thomas who was at Boundary, when he said great is the 
value of patience. This Thomas was the son of a widow. 
He was a quiet sensible good-looking boy but he had no 
way of livelihood only his day's pay and seldom he had 
even that at that time. Often a party of them would go 
from Ventry parish and other places, digging potatoes north 
beyond Tralee. Thomas's uncle was of one of these parties- 
spalpeens they called them. Each man had his own spade 
on his shoulder. There was a special place in Tralee which 
was called Spalpeen Street, for they used all gather in that 
street, and any farmer who wanted a pair or three could 
find them in that street. Thomas's uncle and five other 


2 Gone to our Heavenly award. 



16 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


spalpeens \vere in one house digging potatoes. The man of 
the house was an independent farmer and a good man too. 
He had no unmarried family save one daughter. The other 
three were married out and everyone of them well off. 
Because he had no son it was to this woman he had planned 
to leave the house and land. She was a big-hearted pleasant 
girl and Thomas's uncle was very friendly with her. He was 
always telling her that he had a fine handsome boy at home 
himself and she'd never marry another man if she saw him. 
'Musha,' she'd say, 'isn't it a pity he wouldn't come with 
ye so I'd see him.' 
'Have patience,' says Thomas's uncle, 'and if we stay 
alive next year he'll be here with me." 
'All right,' says she, 'don't forget it.' 
As soon as the potatoes were dug each man put his spade 
on his shoulder and then moved to the road. After the uncle 
coming home, Thomas was there asking him questions about 
the Tralee people. The uncle was glad telling him about 
everything and above all about the young woman who was 
so eager to see him. 
'From where did she know me?' said Thomas, and he 
wondering, and fancying to hear the story. 
'Indeed, man, I was telling her about you and I think 
she took great interest in my talk and,' said he, 'she told 
me not to come again without you being along with me.' 
'We have time enough to be thinking,' said Thomas. 
'A look before us is better than two looks behind us,' said 
the uncle, 'and may God put us right!' 
The year coming to them, Thomas and the uncle were 
very busy. He put a new suit in the making and fixed the 
little house, because he had some thoughts in his head 
nobody knew save himself and the uncle. 
As soon as the start of the harvest came everyone was 
readying himself: especially those who were going to face north 



Red Tommy and Margaret O'Brien 


17 


to Tralee. The morning they were going to go Thomas came 
to his mother and told her that he was going to go with his 
uncle north, and not to be worried or troubled if a while of 
the year be spent before he would return. The poor mother 
became sort of afraid, but she had no business interfering 
with him; all she had to do was to let God's blessing on his 
road. Then he said his farewell and took himself out the 
door. He took with him his sickle and spade. The uncle 
was ready before him and they went to the road. More and 
more men were on the same road, each one shouldering his 
own arms. 
The coming Saturday they were standing as usual at the 
Spalpeen's fair. They weren't long there when there were 
farmers in plenty bargaining with them. But the uncle 
didn't need to do much bargaining for he knew well the 
man he was working for often before that, Thomas O'Brien. 
As soon as the uncle saw him coming he welcomed him. 
'I see,' said O'Brien, 'you have a stranger today with you.' 
'I have,' said the uncle. 'We have use for more. Have 
you a way for work for him?' 
'I have and welcome,' said O'Brien. 'Come on.' 
He had a horse and cart and he told them sit in and they 
wouldn't be long going home. As soon as they were ready 
he struck the horse and away with them. They weren't long 
going to the house. As soon as they reached it the bright 
welcomes were before them especially by the young woman 
because of the stranger being with them. The young woman 
was in a hundred pieces around them. Soon the dinner was 
ready and herself sat to the table with them. 
In the morning everyone was at his task for there was a 
big field of wheat to be cut and they had to be working 
hard. But that didn't leave them without companionship 
and pastime. The young woman of the house, Margaret, 
was there and among the boys that were there, there was 



18 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


one very great ,vith her. But since Thomas came to the 
house this boy \vas watching Margaret. He decided in his 
mind that she was making more friendly with Thomas than 
she was with him, and a sort of jealousy was coming on him. 
Fe\\T nights but there ,yould be company in O'Brien's 
house, especially since the outsiders came there. They were 
gathered there one night and they had dancing and singing 
going on. Thomas was a very nice singer and the young 
,yornan thought there ,vas no better songster in the Province 
of Munster. She'd close her eyes and taste the s,veetness of 
the words in the depth of her heart. She couldn't do that 
unbeknownst, however. Whoever noticed her, this boy I say 
didn't forget to put his eye on her. He got a fit in his heart, 
but he didn't say a word, but to bow down his head. 
'By my palms, White John,' said a prattling old fellow 
who was trying to re-liven his pipe at the same time, 'but 
I'm afraid the man of the ash will put the man of the (turf) 
stack out.' 
'0 merry old pot-rack, 'tis for you this is,' said a sturdy 
fellow sitting near them. 
'Musha, I leave it as a will to God, dear friend, that 
treachery is al,vays in them, the women,' said White John. 
'As we know, the poet didn't leave so much out when he 
said: "A woman who is made for one man and another 
woman who challenges all",' and he bowed his head down 
again and went thinking. 
'Margaret, Margaret,' said he, and he hopped up 
standing and said in full voice to be heard the same by all 
,vho were present: 
'If my love were through the centre of your heart 
As your love, and death, are destroying me, 
You'd walk mountains and heather glens for me 
To give a kiss or two from your heart to me,' 
and in the batting of an eye he was clean beyond the door. 



Red Tommy and Margaret O'Brien 


19 


'The devil is done, and the Spotted Town is burnt!' said 
the man of the house, hopping up standing. 
'Don't mind him, Dad,' said Margaret, 'there's nothing 
done. ' 
'0 daughter of my soul,' said he, 'that good man is gone 
from the house in anger.' 
'Don't mind that, Dad,' said she, 'there's a better man 
than him in this house tonight,' and she caught Thomas by 
the hand. 'Sing a song for me,' said she to him. 
'The devil I won't have refusing you!' said Thomas and 
he started to sing 'Margaret Roche'. 
He wasn't backward with it. He didn't sing a song so 
musically or truly in what was spent of his life. He didn't 
omit a syllable or a sound-beat. Everything was silent save 
the wind that was stirring the leaves of the old oak tree in 
the back garden. There was that much sweetness in his 
voice that he so moved old O'Brien that two tears ran down 
his cheeks. 
When the harvest was saved and they had the potatoes 
dug it was time for the spalpeens to go to their own homes. 
There was nobody it was worrying more than Margaret. 
She didn't like to open the story to her father but her 
patience broke before Thomas and his uncle left the house. 
'Dad,' said she, 'I am asking one request of you. I gave 
the love of my breast and soul entirely to that stranger that 
has been in the same house with us this while back. He is 
going in the morning with the rest of them, and what will 
I do after him? O! Dad, do something! Tell him not to go! 
I feel my heart slipping from me. I don't know at all if he 
goes what I will do.' 
'Musha, 0 daughter of my soul, I am henceforth but an 
old tall-fellow, but I'd prefer you'd choose some other 
husband who'd have worldly property behind him. He's a 
good man \\Tithout a doubt. I noticed him working amongst 


c 



20 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


the men but if you'd do your O\\Tn benefit you'd leave those 
thoughts aside. Oh! you'll get a better man than he and a 
budgetful of yellow gold!' 
'Sun nor stars ever shone down on a better man, Dad, 
and every knuckle of his feet and hands is worth a budgetful 
of yellow gold.' 
'It" is ever said, 0 daughter, that a person prefers an inch 
of his \vill to a hand of his benefit. Have your will! He is a 
good man-I have no fault on him but that he is poor 
wi thou t property.' 
'Musha, good is the father God gave me,' said she and 
she ran to him and spread her arms around him. 
'You'd rather have Thomas now than me!' said he. 
'Both of ye! Both of ye,' said she and the tears were 
coming from her eyes with joy. 
Then the match \\Tas made and Thomas and Margaret 
O'Brien were married on the coming Tuesday. But alas, 
the mischief-maker was never silent. The coming year 
O'Brien met a man from Ventry parish and he was asking 
for Thomas. Envy of Thomas came in his heart, the luck 
he'd had, and he told O'Brien that he hadn't as a son-in- 
law but a contemptible widow's son who had no strength 
or vigour only his day's pay. When O'Brien heard this he 
thought the people in the west had no sauce with their 
potatoes 3 only himself and that trifler of a spalpeen who 
stole the heart of his pet daughter he had on the hearth. 
Things would not be like that when he'd go home. He'd 
give them the ropes side of the house. He spoke to himself 
this way: 
'Bad advice drives a person to the scaffold, but wasn't I 
big amongst the people west there until that trifler of a 
spalpeen came my way? But that soft foolish girl of a 
daughter I have \vas the cause of it, the guileless fool. I told 
3 Meat or fish instead of potatoes only. 



Red Tommy and Margaret O'Brien 


21 


her that was how it would be, but she coaxed me with her 
babyish tears. But I'll have my revenge.' 
When he came home he turned on the daughter. The 
poor girl gave him the best petting anyone ever got. She 
bought sweet cakes in the town for him but if she gave him 
honey on dishes she couldn't satisfy the angry devil inside 
him. 
'Thomas,' said she one day, 'what my father has planned 
is to throw us out on the road. He has the spite in his nose 
for us this while back and choice doesn't go from the 
remedy. What I have planned to do is to fix the house in 
the corner of the farm if you would be satisfied and may- 
be, with the help of God, my father's anger would 
ebb yet.' 
'All right, Margaret,' said he and they gathered their 
things and went to live in the small house. Poor Margaret 
,vas tormented but it was worse with her for Thomas. 
'Have patience,' he'd say, 'for great is the value of 
patience. You'll have no want as long as God leaves me my 
health. ' 
They were passing life like that together, a while easy 
and a while hard, until the coming harvest. It was common 
at that time for people to be in contention with each other 
at all hours, trying to be the best man over each other. A 
man ,vas no use without a party of hard men to back him 
up. A man whom a faction followed would be sooner 
received than great wealth with a man ,vho had nobody 
behind him. 
It happened that another farmer had a notice put up 
that he and his men would be in the town of Tralee on a 
certain day and that he expected O'Brien leading his men 
to be there. When O'Brien heard this he put together his 
men but didn't bother to call Thomas. On the morning of 
the fight he said to his wife, Margaret: 



22 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


'This is a funny tale we have today. Your father is in 
danger of being killed without my being there to help him.' 
'If there's treachery, it returns!' said she. 'My father was 
treacherous to you and how could you go in danger or 
jeopardy for him? Don't mind it.' 
'Good against bad is the noblest action, little woman,' 
said Thomas. 'Come on with you ! We'll go to the spot, 
whatever.' 
Here's to the road with them when they were ready but 
when they came to the place of the fight they had nobody 
to see there but the fat strong hulk giving every twist to his 
blackthorn stick and every second shout from him that he 
was the one that routed O'Brien. Thomas strolled towards 
the Spalpeen's market. As luck in the world had it who 
should be there standing before him but his uncle and 
twenty-seven men of his near friends from Ballythomas with 
him and his own spade beside each man of them. 
'0 God of Powers, Thomas, where were you from 
the battle?' said the uncle. 'Such a beating and mixing I 
never saw! I was peering here and there but I didn't see 
you amongst the men. Where were you?' 
'I was at home,' said Thomas. 'It seems he did not need 
my help.' 
'Don't say that, Thomas,' said the uncle. 'Woe to the 
man in a country without one of his own for "On the 
fighting day the stick lays on his side." The stick was 
heavily laid on your wife's father today. He's over in there 
as gentle as a lamb. Don't you hear that man of the shouting 
down there .. . the boasting he has about his heroism? 
Now is your time!' said he to Thomas. 'There's no man of 
these with me who will not go as far as gambling his soul 
for you. Go across over and tell him to come out.' 
Thomas went over to where O'Brien was and caught him 
by the hand. 



Red Tommy and Margaret O'Brien 


23 


'Arise, man,' said he, 'we are not beaten yet. The man 
of the shouting won't take disgracing you beneath clay or 
stones with him!' 
O'Brien was very unwilling because he had had more 
than enough of the day already, but Thomas was urging 
hard at him until he made him arise. They walked out then 
and Thomas let one loud shout out of him. 
'Now is the time for the shouting people!' said he. 
'O'Brien is here and where is the man who would nod his 
fist towards him? If that man be, now is his time!' 
When the fat hulk of the shouting heard him he gathered 
to him his men and they came to where O'Brien was. 
O'Brien's men were not far from him, those who were not 
wounded, but they were only as a handful of straw com- 
pared with the twenty-seven men who were standing by 
Thomas's shoulder. 
The big man gave a running charge at O'Brien, but he 
didn't succeed because Thomas put him eating the clay 
with a belt of a fist. There was never in the town of Tralee 
or since then any day of slaughter greater and the chasing 
and scattering of small birds was put on O'Brien's enemies. 
When O'Brien himself saw that he had won and that 
Thomas was responsible, he had the shame of the world on 
him because of how much he had wronged him. He took 
him by the hand then. 
'Forgive me!' said he. 'I did it black on you; but don't 
mind that now. Come home with me, and there's no danger 
that I'll antagonize you again as long as I live.' 
He took with him Thomas and his spalpeens to his house, 
and believe me left them wanting nothing for a week. From 
that day Thomas and his wife, Margaret, were back in their 
own house again and often they all had company and 
pastime and conversation together. 



CHAPTER FOUR 


The Old Woman who Wronged her Son 


It's a proverb 'That often a tailor promised and wouldn't 
come'. In my own youth there were country tailors in 
plenty, going from house to house, working. Often a tailor 
would have promised to you, and couldn't come for two 
months. There was none of them more talked about than 
John the Tailor. He was a man offun and tricks, a man you 
wouldn't feel a long winter's night with, listening to him 
singing or telling long classical stories. It was said that there 
was no better story-teller in his time. 
One night he was making a flannel vest for my father, 
there were a lot of people of the hamlet gathered into our 
house listening to him. I was small that time but I was old- 
wise enough to give a listening ear to the tailor. Up on the 
table he was sitting, with his legs crossed and his scissors, 
his measure, his thimble and his stick by him. 
'Aye, tailor,' said the small smith, 'as it's you travels 
around most, it's your turn for a new story.' 
'Indeed,' said the tailor, 'it's many a thing the like of me 
sees. As we know, the one who travels is storied and I'm 
one of that unlucky tribe, driven from place to place and 
from town to town, having a night here and a night there- 
at Oat Quarter last night, at Vicars town tonight, and maybe 
in Glenfawn tomorrow night. But I tell you I saw one thing 
made me marvel, and made me cross too, and it often runs 
into my mind since. 
'My grandfather was a good tailor. 'Twas he taught me 
my trade. "I used to be with him in every house he worked 
in. It happened that we were working in a certain house. 



The Old Woman who Wronged her Son 25 
Life wasn't too good then, and it was hard for poor people 
to live. The people of this house I say had very little income 
but whatever income there was the old woman of the house 
was often gaining out of it. Her daughter was married in 
the hamlet nearest to her. She had the full of the house of 
children and the mother used to be trying, naturally, to 
give her a little help known and unknown. Her son was 
married in the house and often the old woman and her 
son's wife used to be in each other's hair-combs. However,' 
said the tailor, 'myself and my grandfather were working 
hard. As soon as we had eaten the morning meal the young 
woman went from the house on some errand. When the 
. old woman found the house to herself she started to hide a 
lot of things somewhere up in the room. There was no 
dozing on my grandfather because there was no move the 
old woman made but he was noticing; especially as he knew 
that many people suspected her to be causing the dis- 
turbance in the house. 
'It was near on dinner-time when the young woman 
came home, and it was well on dinner-time for myself and 
my grandfather. But there was no purpose or attention 
being given to us. The hunger of the \vorld was on me, and 
I was longing for the table to be set. 
, "God with my soul, Grandad," said I, "is it how we 
came here to die of the famine?" 
, "You are sharp in appetite, 0 son," said he, "but I'm 
afraid you'll have a long stand on weak legs." 
'I was fit to faint when the young woman called home the 
people of the house. They were working in the field, and the 
field was a good piece from the house, and this woman was 
bone-lazy. All she did was to get up on the top of the fence 
and call on them at the top of her head and voice. When 
they came home my grandfather hopped down off the table 
and gathered to him his things. 



26 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


, "Catch the head of that table!" said he, to the man of 
the house. They moved it over near a settle-bed in the 
corner. My grandfather sat on a chair at the head of the 
table and the man of the house sat beside him. Myself and 
the other man were sitting on the settle-bed. Indian-meal 
bread and milk was the meal we had. The bread was on 
the table but neither of the two women would bring the 
milk from the room, only every sharp word between them. 
My grandfather spoke: 
, "Musha, morning agony on ye!" said he, "wouldn't one 
of ye bring the milk to us?" 
, '''Tis not I will bring it to you, good man," said the 
young woman and she stood as straight as a guarding goat. 
"But let that thief in the corner take it with her as she 
takes everything. Let her have it, food and milk. 'Tis no 
use for my husband and me to try and live here when 
what's ours is raising another's family." 
'There wasn't a gig out of the man of the house or his 
son. They were chewing at their best; but 'tis how there 
was shame and disgrace on them because myself and my 
grandfather were present. At last the old man's patience 
broke. 
, "Little girl," said he, "you'd be better to have sense. 
There's nobody interfering with you or taking anything 
from you." 
, "I say that you have it wrong," said the young woman. 
'''Tis unknown to you that life is passing, but it's not passing 
unknown to me, because 'tis me the shoe is hurting," and 
she stood up and went into the room where the old woman 
had the booty hidden. There wasn't a word from anyone 
but all our eyes were on the room. The old woman was 
sitting in the corner and a flame in her eyes like there would 
be in the eyes of a wildcat. It wasn't long until the young 
woman threw out a bag: 



The Old Woman who Wronged her Son 


27 


'''Look at that!" said she to the man of the house. 
"That is how your oaten meal is going! And look at this!" 
said she with another bag, "that is how your meal is going,' 
and she threw out a bag and another bag; "and honest 
man," said she to my grandfather, "is it any wonder for 
me to be talking?" 
'Before the word was out of her mouth the old woman 
had jumped out of the corner, had a grip on the hair of her 
head and dragged her to the floor with her. Though the 
young woman was hard and strong, she couldn't get the 
upper hand of the old woman. We were looking at them 
raking each other, but nobody was inclined to go between 
them. 
, "Your soul from the devil!" says my grand father to 
the young man, "is there none of your wife's pain on 
you?" 
, "Musha, I don't know what I should do, good man," 
said he. "They have me out of my mind." 
, "It was said always," said my grandfather, "as near as 
his coat is to a man, nearer to him than that is his shirt. 
That's your way with you and your married wife." 
'Then my grandfather sprang from his chair and grabbed 
the old woman and put her sitting in the corner. 
, "Sit up there for yourself you little hag of mischief!" 
said he. "The people were right who said it was you were 
causing the disturbance. I'm watching you since morning 
unknown to you and I'm a witness to what you have done; 
and I admit that the young woman has all the right 
against you." 
'He turned then to the old man of the house: 
, "According to your conscience," said he, "let there be 
an end to this. You are the man of the house and it's you 
have to settle everything. It's a great shame for you to 
wrong your son and this poor girl who brought her purse 



28 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


of money to you. The poor couple have enough care without 
throwing what's theirs to others." 
, "1 admit you are completely right," said the old man, 
"and definitely, were it not for you, 1 ,vouldn't believe from 
the parish priest that they would have the like in them." 
'From that day out and until the day they died, the angel 
of peace was among them.' 



CHAPTER FIVE 


A Man who was Clean in the Sight if 
People, but Unclean in the Sight if God 


My love my Lord God! Isn't it straight and smooth life 
goes on according to His true holy will! Shouldn't we be 
joyful for His glorious light to be lit amongst us! Isn't there 
still many a person lying in the dark! God with us, Lord, 
isn't that a pity! I understand that there is no more valuable 
jewel in life than to have love for God of Glory, for I have 
gone through life and I see a lot that reminds me of the 
great power .of God. I am here alone in this lonely place, 
looking back on the pleasant life I have spent and thinking 
on all the people who were there in my time and who are 
gone on the Way of Truth. May God grant them the eternal 
rest! It's hard news if the bush is in the gap before us. But 
the sinner's benefit is to be for ever in love with God, and 
not to be the same as a certain Peter. 
This Peter was a mouthful among the parishes. He was 
important. There \vasn't his better in his time. The man 
of the big heart, they called him. The tramp that went the 
road it was in Peter's house he stayed. He never let a person 
from his door without giving him lodging for the night. Its 
mark was on him; everyone was full of affection for him 
and on road and path there was only Peter on their lips. 
But as we know, there's nothing but a while in this life 
for anybody, and Peter had only a while. On the day of his 
death it surprised the people when they saw the crowds 
coming to the house of his corpse. It happened that Michael 
Mannion was coming there. A tough, strong, courageous 



3 0 


An Old Woman's R
flections 


man was Michael, a man it would be difficult to put fear 
or fright on. When he was going the road east from the 
Hollow of the Sheep at the departing of day from night, he 
saw the rider meeting him on horseback. They saluted 
each other. 
'Might I ask you, good man, where you are going?' said 
the rider. 
'You might, certainly, stranger-man,' said Michael. 
'Going to the wakehouse I am. The best man we had is 
stretched tonight and many a man and woman have moist 
eyes after him.' 
'All of ye have great great woe after this man,' said the 
rider. 'Everyone I met on the way, they are sorry to be 
parting with him.' 
'Oh! man of parts, there was none better than him. His 
going is the ruin of country and place and nobody was 
ungrateful to poor Peter, may God have mercy on his soul!' 
said Michael. 
'Maybe somebody was, good man,' said the rider. 'But, 
whisper! would it be any hurry with you to go down in 
this glen down here and the big flagstone that's there, to 
lift it and look down under it? I promise you you'll see a 
thing that will amaze you. I will wait here until you come 
back. ' 
'By my own palms, it's no hurry, stranger-man,' said 
Michael, and jumped over the fence of the road. 
When he went to where the flagstone was a sort of fear 
came on him, but he was loath to have any cowardliness 
come on him-a man as courageous as he. The flagstone 
was heavy but Michael succeeded in lifting it so that he 
saw clearly what was under it. It was barely that his soul 
didn't fall out of him when he saw it. 'Tis how a person's 
skeleton, unrecognizable, was lying under the centre of that 
flagstone! 



A Man who was Clean in the Sight of PeoPle 3 I 
He came to where the rider was, and amazement in him. 
'Oh, good man,' said he, 'isn't it the queer place you sent 
me! When 1 lifted the flagstone 'tis how there was a person's 
skeleton lying under it, and it unrecognizable.' 
'And do you know who put it there?' said the rider. 
'I don't know from the land of the world who did the 
ugly deed,' said Michael. 
'That man you and all praise! That's the man who did 
the bad act. He was clean in your sight but he was unclean 
in the sight of God. 1 tell you that praise from people is 
inconstant. ' 
He spurred his horse and left Michael there thinking to 
himself in the middle of the road. 



CHAPTER SIX 


A Woman who Forsook her Husband)- 
a Fox and a Hen)- and Other Matters 


I remember well the fine summer's day my father took me 
south to the Flagstone Hollow. I was only a little girl at 
that time. The sun. was shining beautifully and every place 
full of flowers. Out before us on the road there were sheep 
and the lambs dancing after them. The birds were merrily 
singing in the bushes that were growing on both sides of 
the road, and I running here and there, plucking blossoms 
and at the same time listening to the birds and looking at 
the young lambs dancing. It was well late when I reached 
Flagstone a little below Vicarstown, and those little things 
delayed me_ It was a small thatched house there belonging 
to a person related to me named Patrick O'Kennedy. He 
was a small man but he had a roomy hospitable heart and 
he was good company. When night fell Eamonn and 
Thomas came in the door. They were next-door neighbours 
and one was no better than the other to make good com- 
pany. 
'Welcome, men,' said the woman of the house. 
'May ye all live sound and alive!' said Eamonn in smart 
reply and he sat on a chair that was in the corner, threw a 
leg over one knee and started to put tobacco into his pipe. 
'Have you any new tidings, Eamonn?' said Patrick, 
interrupting him. 
'I haven't, mush a, only Sean Dermot dying.' 
'Musha, sound and alive be the teller!' said Patrick. 
'The poor man! As we know, he wasn't too old yet.' 



A Woman who Forsook her Husband 


33 


'He wasn't,' said Eamonn, 'and it's now he'd be better 
off because of the inheritance that came to him from 
America. ' 
'Indeed,' said Thomas, 'isn't it fine Brigid Connor heard 
that it came to him!' 
'She heard,' said Patrick. 'What is not heard?' 
'Musha, she not leaving him be!' said Eamonn. 'As if it 
wasn't time for her to come to him! She didn't stay with 
him when he was young and strong.' 
'Oh, a good hurler is the man on the fence,' said Thomas. 
'As we know, nobody ever had enough sense, especially 
young people. They want nothing but their own way. Sean 
was a quiet, sensible boy, too, with only one fault on him, 
that is, being poor ,vithout land or riches and Brigid was 
young and airy when she married him. There was nothing 
making her dizzy only being married to Sean, like a lot of 
other girls.' 
'And did she know, Thomas,' said Mary, the woman of 
the house, 'that Sean Dermot had no means when she 
married him?' 
'Yah, the poor girl didn't know anything about it,' said 
Patrick. "Tis how a wrong ,vas done on her. There was a 
woman related to Sean married to a man from Milltown. 
He was a pedlar. They had a donkey and cart and they 
used to be going from place to place selling pins and needles 
and a lot of other goods. When they'd have the full of the 
cart sold, they'd go to the town of Tralee because that was 
the best place they'd get the little articles they wanted. It 
happened that the woman related to Sean got to know 
Brigid Connor who was a servant girl in the house they 
stayed in. She would be coaxing and advising her to give 
up service and saying there was a fine good-looking boy 
related to herself in Ventry parish and if she'd care to 
marry him she'd have a life more happy and satisfied. 



34 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


'The poor girl was heeding her, no wonder, because she 
often would tell her that service was the worst; there was 
nothing worse than being under the hand of other people. 
A little while after that the friendship started between them 
because Sean got a letter that was full of love. Though he 
never saw Brigid something in that letter awoke in his 
heart something he never felt before that. "By gor", he said 
to himself: "I'll pay her a visit and I'll know what sort of a 
woman she is." Then he went to his relative woman and 
asked her about the young woman-where she was living 
and a lot of other questions. When he had some information, 
he dressed himselfup and faced the road to Tralee. Nobody 
knew where Sean was gone until he came home and Brigid 
Connor married with him. 
'There wasn't as much talking done about any couple 
married in eight years before as was done about Sean 
Dermot and Brigid Connor. At market and fair there wasn't 
in the people's mouth but the pair. 
'I t's for ever said that the three things that run swiftest 
are a stream of water, a stream of fire, and a stream of 
falsehood, and a lot of falsehood was being mixed through 
the whisper-lis per that was going on. Brigid was very young 
and it was easy to disguise a calf on her, especially as she 
was a stranger, not mixing with people. 
'It was in Sean's house the young girls of the hamlet used 
to be gathered since Brigid came there. Often they'd have 
conversation and company afoot and it would go very hard 
with Brigid when she'd see Sean so great with them. She'd 
often be watching him under the eyelashes unknown to 
him and she'd say to herself: "Sean is making more friendly 
with other young women than with me!" and a kind of 
jealousy was coming on her. Sean hadn't a notion that any- 
thing like that was worrying her. It's difficult to put a wise 
head on a young body, and another thing, Brigid was a 



A Woman who Forsook her Husband 


35 


girl from a town and wasn't used to country ways or the 
country work that goes with it, and it wasn't long until the 
poor girl tired of it. On Saturday morning she spoke to 
Sean: 
, "I'm going home for a while, Sean," she said, "and I 
hope you'll not be great with any other woman until I 
return. " 
, "All right," said Sean, "it will do you good to pay a 
visit to your people. A person is like that at first after 
marriage and especially in a strange place. But I'll be lonely 
until you come again." 
'But Sean had a long loneliness on him because Brigid 
didn't return after a week, or after a fortnight, or after a 
year, nor for forty years after that.' 
'Musha, wasn't it of him she made the fool!' said Thomas. 
'She made a greater fool than that of him,' said Patrick, 
'because she wrote a letter to him five years after she left 
him which told him to come for her and she'd come home 
with him. The poor deluded man went east to the town of 
Tralee. She was there before him, without a doubt, and 
she was nice and kind to the poor fellow, as though true. 
Sean thought the rising sun on a fine autumn morning no 
brighter than she when he saw her coming towards him in 
the street. My poor man spread out his arms and thanked 
God who brought him his way. He put the bright welcomes 
before her. All the youngsters of the street were looking at 
the poor simpleton, making fun of him, but poor Sean 
thought, no wonder, that it was some sport they had going 
on. He wasn't used to the likes of them, and therefore he 
had no great interest in them. 
'When they had done a lot of talking and discussed life 
as they wished, she took him with her and she never stopped 
until she came to the most backward and miserable place 
in the town of Tralee, and she left him there, a foolish 


D 



3 6 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


article, not knovving ,vhich way to go, east or west. At last 
he found someone who guided him. 
'When he came home he wouldn't tell his tale to anyone, 
but the thing he'd say was: "To the devil I give my share 
of the women, any,vay!" , 
'He had his piece said,' said Thomas, 'but 'tis not on him 
alone that ailment is. It's too easy for him to find a partner.' 
'The poor man was falling and rising with life, like many,' 
said Patrick. 'He had a nice prosperous house and a small 
garden. He was living happily but when the inheritance 
came to him he wasn't in the same place since. I suppose 
the poor man's heart rose up in him. Seven hundred pounds 
,vas a big lob of money, coming unexpectedly. It was riches 
and as we know it gave many something to talk about 
because it was the hope unthought of. The story went from 
mouth to mouth until Brigid heard it, who was then an old 
woman. What do you say to her,' said Patrick, 'but that 
she didn't decide to come to Sean? On a summer's day 
Sean was up on top of the hill footing turf. It wasn't of 
Brigid Connor he ,vas thinking but of his money pennies. 
He was for ever thinking how best to deal with it. He spent 
the day like that, working and thinking. It was the hunger 
that first made him move from his worryings. 
, "God with my soul!" said he, "I have the day spent! 
The sun is sliding down over the hills." 
'He caught the old jacket that was thro,vn on the bank 
and didn't stop until he reached the house. The arrange- 
ment of servant or horse wasn't on the hearth before him 
and he himself had to fix the fire. He was sitting on the chair 
with his back down to the door when he found somebody 
coming in. He turned around and saw a nice middle-aged 
woman standing near the table. He stood up to give her 
charity, for he thought she was a travelling-woman. When 
he came to her with a small plate of potatoes, she looked at 



A Woman who Forsook her Husband 


37 


him and sniggered-"Sean, my pet, it's no charity I want." 
'Arrah, friend of my soul, he was startled, because the 
sound of her speech reminded him of something. 
, "And what do you want?" said he. 
, "Is it how you don't recognize me ?" said she. 
, "I don't recognize you, "voman," said Sean, in wonder, 
"How do I know who you are-and I don't care-but be 
going." 
, "It's not for that I came," said she. 
, "And what else, if so?" said Sean. 
, "To look after you, my pet, for the rest of our lives! Am 
I not Brigid, your wife, and 'tis how I came to stay with 
you. " 
'A burst of anger swelled in Sean's heart and he told her, 
in words he was never taught in school, to be out of the 
house. She dug her foot down that she wouldn't go out for 
him, but he took her by the shoulder, and threw her out 
the door. 
, "May you never leave me alone!" said he, "if it's not 
time for you to come to me at the end of my life! And 'tis 
not to me you "vere coming but to my money! But 'tis little 
of it you'll have, whoever will. I'd rather throw it in the 
river's stream than possess you of any of it, you little hag!" 
and he closed the door on her. 
'She had to clear off, and he didn't see her since. 
'Awhile after that a brother's daughter came to look after 
hinl.. The poor man is failing and someone \vill have a good 
hoard after him.' 
'There's nobody has more right to it than the young girl 
who is minding him at the end of his life,' said Mary. 
'That's true,' said Patrick. "Tis said "My love you \vhen 
you have something." Small fear but it will be well watched.' 
The next morning there was no drowsiness on Patrick. 
He was up early to change the cattle from the night-field. 



3 8 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


A little after him his wife, Mary, arose and was busy seeing 
to the duties of the morning. She was making so much 
noise and racket that I woke up. All the noise surprised me. 
'What's wrong with you, Mary,' said I, 'that you're 
making all the noise?" 
'The devil of a fox, musha, my pet,' said she. 'There 
isn't a hen or a duck in the place but he has carried away 
after the night.' 
'You don't care if he didn't sneak up on your own little 
hens! ' 
'Musha, long straying on him!' said she. 'He has my big 
spotted hen after the night, a hen I wouldn't allow for half 
a sovereign, and I suppose he has more,' and she went from 
me with some food on a dish. You'd hear her half a mile 
from home calling the hens. But her object was to get the 
big hen. 
I was up and at the fireside when she came in. 
'Did you find her?' said I. 
'I didn't, my pet, nor I won't,' said she. 'The twister is 
too cute for me. He takes a bite with him on his visits always. 
They're gone from Kate down here, too.' 
'It's a great thing that he didn't make ye envy each 
other!' said I. 
'Arrah, girl, if he took three of them it wouldn't pain me 
any-but my fine hen-and I after giving my gold crown 
for herself and a dozen eggs over there at the harbour 
last year!' 
'May naught but she go from you,' said I. 
'Dh! yes indeed, my pet, it's fine and easy you have it! 
I hate the scolding I'll get from Patrick more than anything. 
He doesn't have anything to say to me only that I don't 
secure the little shed any way properly on them. But I 
thought if he was the accursed one himself, that he couldn't 
reach them last night.' 



A Woman who Forsook her Husband 


39 


'Oh! Mammy, Daddy is coming, and the tea not ready 
for him!' said little Thomas, the small son who was standing 
in the doorway. 
'God welcome him, my pet,' said she, 'God welcome 
him!' and with that Patrick came in, after bringing the 
cows home for milking. Mary was busy preparing the tea. 
'Bring the cups over with you,' said she to me. 
I hopped over the floor fussing and put the appearance 
of work on me. Patrick was sitting on a chair at the head 
of the table without a gig from him. It was seldom with 
him to be so quiet, because he was a nice, chatty, pleasant 
little man. Mary moved over to him. 
'In the account of God, Pat,' said she, 'the fox took two 
hens from me last night. But what is the importance to me 
only the big spotted hen that I was saving! I wouldn't 
allow, for Ireland, that she'd be taken!' 
'Don't be bothering me with your hens!' said Patrick, 
and anger in his voice. 
'What's this crankiness on you?' said Mary, and she 
stood before him like a soldier. 
'It is that you should be ashamed to treat so a ridge of 
new potatoes, knowing well you could get no potato there 
yet. But if you wanted them why didn't you dig them 
properly and not give them a pig's rooting?' 
Mary stopped and looked him between the two eyes. 
'Musha, are you serious?' said she. 'Doesn't your heart 
know that I had nothing to do with them?' 
'Go west and look at them,' said he, 'and you'll see the 
trace of your work.' 
That speech took the memory of the hens from her mind, 
and she didn't wait to eat enough food, but to go out and 
go to where the spoiling was done. That was for her to be 
seen, without doubt. There were a lot of stalks broken and 
the place around them torn and little hollows here and 



40 An Old Woman's Reflections 
there in the ridge. She started to gather the clay in to the 
bottoms of the stalks, because the ne\-v potatoes weren't ripe 
yet. In the covering she came across SOine hard lump under 
the clay. She scooped the clay out of the way and what 
was it but the big hen, hidden by the fox for himself for 
the coming night. Here she came, in, at the end of her soul, 
with the hen in her hand. 
'Look, cross one,' said she, 'what did the spoiling! The 
devil of a fox did it, and mischance to him! ifhe killed her, 
he didn't succeed in eating her!' 
A kind of shame came on Patrick over the scolding he 
had given his wife. 
'Musha, a cause to laugh for us, wife,' said he, 'as Peter 
said long ago when he found the ass drowned!' 
I plucked the hen myself and we put it boiling. Myself 
and Patrick ate every scrap of it for Mary couldn't taste of 
it because it was the fox that killed it. 
We spent that day happy and content together, but ,vhen 
the night came, whatever spurred Patrick, he put the horse 
into the Slab Field, tethered. The poor man didn't under- 
stand that it was dangerous for him there, but it's after- 
wards all acts are understood. The small field was very 
dangerous altogether, because there was a deep hollow in 
one end of it and no shielding fence between the horse and 
the hollow, and whatever reaching over he did at the edge 
of the hollow he fell and broke his back, may they be safe 
where it's told! 
When Patrick went for him the next morning to bring 
him home, it was on his poor heart the hard grip came, for 
he had nothing else in life but his children and his horse. 
He was cold poor then, the poor man, unable to put his 
hand in his pocket to alter matters. 
When he came to the house with the bad news 
Mary nearly lost her mind. Poor people who are not 



A Woman who Forsook her Husband 


4 1 


succeeding in life are a great pity. They are vexed and 
mal trea ted. 
Patrick and Mary were in dire straits for years after that, 
contending with a bare hearth and a pack of young children, 
with only two little donkeys to ,vork. Often Mary was on 
the road and the two donkeys in front of her, turning to do 
work with them. But it's true that dearest to God is a poor 
vexed person. They \vcre striving along until the eldest son 
grew up in age and ability. He went into service with a 
farmer in the neighbourhood, and in two years he had 
managed to have enough money earned to buy a young 
horse for his father, coupled with whatever scraping he 
himself was able to do. 
It's on poor Mary the joy was when the young horse 
came to the house, because she made out that she had seen 
the last of life's hardship. Her family was grown; one was 
in service and two more able to help their father and that 
lightened the yoke and the heartbreak for herself. 
They were spending life in comfort together, but when a 
person thinks it's nice 'tis how it's a mocking trick. It was 
that same way with Mary for when she had life at its best 
her head was brought low. A bout of sickness struck her 
husband, Patrick, and he spent a year on his bed, and not 
improving. He died unexpected by Mary. That left her 
hardship for the rest of her life. It's often I used to pay her 
a visit because I was closely related to her. Though life was 
hard for her, she didn't lose the fine, wide laugh or the 
big, generous heart. 



CHAPTER SEVEN 


The Snail- Trick,. Tommy Grijftn J s 
Death,. a Wake 


In the neighbourhood near us there was a little small man 
whose name was Tommy Griffin. He was a stocky, strong 
fellow and had the name of being an able man. He had a 
nice little farm of land and the luck of this life was good 
with him. But he had the worst fault any man or woman 
ever had-he hadn't the heart of a mouse. He never once 
gave a dish of potatoes to a tramp of the roads, or a cup of 
milk. We used to be often in his house, spending the evening, 
when we were young girls, growing up. He had the "vife 
who was the best that ever broke bread, and that's a big 
word, but Tommy had a rod on to her. I often saw her 
sneaking a dish of potatoes to old Kit, a travelling woman 
who used to be coming to the hamlet that time. Poor old 
Kit was a great woman for fun and we used to have the 
fun of the world on her. She had a lot of tricks and it's by 
her I saw the snail-trick being done for the first time ever. 
She made Kateen Michael get a basin full of dry sand. 
Two more went out full of excitement, looking for the snail- 
it was easy to get one that time. They came in and they 
had a big, black snail. 
"Tis you are youngest and will marry soonest,' said 
she to Maura Shaun. 'Put the snail in the basin and 
at the end of half-an-hour we'll know the name of the 
boy who ,\Till have you as a wife.' We all started to 
laugh. 
'Arragh, wise woman, where will the poor snail get pen 



The Snail- Trick 


43 


and ink to write with?' said Maura, and a big red face on 
her with shame. 
'Oh indeed it's no laughing,' said old Kit, and she put 
the snail down on the basin. She got a red handkerchief 
then and she spread it as a sheet across the basin. She spoke 
a couple of words under her breath, low, but we didn't 
understand her at all. She left it for a nice while then with- 
out moving it. 
'Yes, little girls, move close to me!' said she, and she 
lifted the sheet. 
We were all around the table then without a word from 
anyone but peeping over each other's shoulders into the basin. 
'Your soul from the spots I know who he is!' said little 
Breeda when she saw the little roads the snail had made on 
the top of the sand, as if the letters 'P' and 'M' were 
written on the sand by him. 
The laughing started again. We all tried that funny 
trick; but it wasn't for need of its magic we were; youth 
was in power with us that time. 
Old Kit was full of tricks and of course we wouldn't prefer 
a piper coming the way to her. But Tommy never gave 
hospitality to her nor to anyone else, just as little. 
It's well I remember the day he was dying in a high bed 
in the corner. It was a little straw-roofed house he had and 
the little house was full of people "vho were after coming to 
inquire for him. He took a start out of them when he spoke: 
'My friends and relatives, I am clearing off,' said he, 'and 
let neither regret nor sorrow be on anyone after me, be- 
cause, by certainty, I didn't earn it. I got from God every 
best jewel any poor person ever got, wealth and health, 
but sharp alas! I did not use them correctly. But Oh my 
Lord! you played me foul ! You gave me everything, but 
you didn't give me the heart!' and he put a shout from him 
you would hear at the other side of the hamlet. 



44 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


The neighbours all ran in but he was dead before them. 
Myself and Kate Jim thought it long until night would 
come and we would be waking him. When we went in the 
corpse was stretched in the bed and eleven candles lighting 
at its foot and there was another candle that wasn't lighting. 
'I wonder is he a danger to us?' said Kate. 'Isn't it the 
ugly appearance he has!' 
'Dh, didn't you ever hear that death puts his own 
appearance on everybody?' said I. 
'I'm afraid of him!' said Kate. 'I won't go near him. I'll 
say my prayer here.' 
The soldiering was in me. 
'I'll go over and I'll strike my hand on his cheek,' said I, 
because I heard my mam saying it, that if you struck your 
hand on a dead person you wouldn't have any loneliness 
on you. 
'But, Peig, why is the other candle not lit?' 
'I know it well,' said I. 'That's the candle that's 
standing up in place of Judas, the one who betrayed our 
Saviour. The other eleven are standing for the rest of the 
apostles. They are guarding the corpse from the enemy who 
is outside.' 
'Dh, the Cross of God between us and him, Peig, may God 
not allow that he'll have anything to do with poor Tommy!' 
'God allows a lot of things, Kate,' said I, 'but avoid evil 
and you have no danger. But, Mary! Isn't the human 
queer! Isn't it nice and chatty Tommy was four nights ago! 
And see now the way he is! I'll bet, Kate, the person who 
stole the shirt off the bush from your mother a few days ago, 
it didn't strike into his mind that he'll be like Tommy!' 
'Dh, it's true for you, Peig, but nobody has enough sense. 
See the old women, what they're up to! What will they 
be doing?' 
'I suppose, Kate, it's keening they'll be,' said I. 



The Snail- Trick 


45 


'Oh, Peig, I'd rather that I stayed at home!' 
'Don't mind that,' said I, 'it's the fate of everybody. 
Don't you see the old women-isn't it little Kate 
Michaeleen thinks of it? See the way she raises his head on 
the pillovv. There's nothing affecting us only youth. A day 
will come on us yet, if we live for it, when we won't be 
afraid.' 
'I don't kno,\' in the world, Peig, but I'm afraid enough 
now, whatever happens. I don't like seeing the face of the 
dead. I don't know what was on me and to come at all! 
Wouldn't I have the company over at home playing puirins 1 
or imitating old Kit. You'd better go with me, Peig, and 
vve'll both go over and we'll stay together until morning!' 
'Don't mind that, but do what I say. Of course, it's not 
right for anyone to go by a wake-house, or to go from it 
without having somebody with hinl. We'll stay another 
,vhile. Tea will be going on immediately. The old women 
are fixing themselves up for it.' 
'The old women are great people for tea, Peig.' 
'That's true for you, Kateen, but I'd say they've a greater 
love for tobacco. It's only a couple of nights ago since my 
father was saying it, that himself saw a woman in Ventry 
parish who sold her shawl for a half-quarter of tobacco.' 
'Musha, wasn't she the fool, Peig? I've a great love for 
tea but that's a thing I wouldn't do.' 
'On my soul, Kate, there are odd women in this parish 
who'd do it.' 
'Musha, it's hard to guess between them. They have a 
great liking for both of them.' 
As we were talking who vvould come down across but 
Big Nell, the woman of the house. 
'Musha, thejoy of my heart for ever, both of you, children,' 
said she. 'Move up to the fire. You're perished with the 
1 A form of Blind Man's Buff. 



4 6 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


cold, but you'll have a cup of tea immediately and a hunk 
of white bread. Little girls have the liking of the world for 
white bread and jam.' 
We moved up to the corner and I felt that Kate was very 
unwilling. But when we were seated in the corner a little 
while, we were very comfortable in it. 
'Let's not go home at all, Kate!' said I, 'we'll have com- 
pany here. We'll be listening to the old people telling stories 
and the old women will be telling each other about their 
affairs. ' 
'I don't know, musha, Peig. I'd rather be asleep.' 
'Don't say that, Kate. Didn't you hear what Tommy said 
the night he was telling us the story-that we should guard 
him well when he'd be laid out. But that night he didn't 
exp
ct death this soon.' 
'0 he didn't, the poor man! But death is a coward who 
often comes without being expected,' said Kate. 
'Yes, Kate, it was true for the poet when he said this 
verse: 


My eye closed and weak is my sense. 
There .is weakness in my limb, a white stocking under 
my Jaw. 
Women will not long have wailing after me 
And long will the corpse of faults be feeling torment., 
'0 God be \vith us, stop and don't make me lonely.' 
'Here, down with you,' said Nell, 'and enjoy this grand 
red jam.' 
'Musha, it's said ever,' said I to myself: 'what a person 
doesn't spend himself: his enemy spends it.' 
We went down helter skelter, and we had an edge on 
our teeth, because it was a long time before that since we 
saw the like. 
When everything was put to one side Big Nell said it 
would be a good thing to say the Rosary for Tommy's soul 



The Snail- Trick 


47 


and the souls of the dead. Before the Rosary was finished 
Kate was asleep soundly with her little mouth open. If I 
were to be hanged I couldn't keep from laughing. When 
Big Nell heard me laughing in my prayer she threw a sod 
of turf on me, but it wasn't to do me any harm she did it, 
the poor woman. When Kate awoke it was bright day and 
we -both went home together. 
It is true the mouth of the grave gives to the needy one, 
and it was the same way with Big Nell. Tommy had a rod 
on to her but well the creature suffered it. No one heard 
her complaining. The man of greatest wealth who ever lived 
had nothing to get in the end but 'the scarce six feet in 
some graveyard'. Tommy was buried and all he had in 
the world stayed with Big Nell and it was she had sport 
from it. She used often say 'What is gathered meanly, it 
goes badly.' Big Nell never let anyone go from her door 
hungry and God gave her all her heart would wish for as 
long as she lived. 



CHAPTER EIGHT 


A Boat-Load of Turf brought from 
Iveragh during a Gale of Wind 


The weather is beautiful and the sun is shining brightly on 
sea and on land. There is freshness and brightness in every- 
thing God created. The sea is polished, and the boys are 
swimming down at the shore. The little fishes themselves 
are splashing on the top of the water and even the old 
people are sitting out here and there sunning themselves. 
Poor humans are overcome after the winter because we have 
a hard life of it on the island for that part of the year- 
hemmed in like a flock of sheep in a pen, buffeted by storm 
and gale, \vithout shade or shelter but like a big ship in the 
middle of a great sea, cut off from the land without news 
coming to us or going from us. But God does the ordering, 
praise for ever to Him, when He sees our hardship. f-Ie 
abates the storm, and gives us the opportunity to go among 
the people, and when the summer and fine weather like 
this come He takes from us the memory and the gloom 
of winter. 
See myself here, sitting on the fence, looking around me 
and thinking on the hundreds of things that are gone. I see 
the change that has come in life in my O\\1n memory, the 
importance and the snobbery. There are white stockings on 
burned heels today and the back of the hand given to the 
customs and manners of the old and an alternative life 
being led. It can't be helped, I suppose, because life is 
changing as the years are passing along. 
When I look to the south on Dingle Bay, that place 



A Boat-Load of Tuif 


49 


reminds me of the time I was a little girl by the fire, listening 
to the old people reminiscing and describing to each other 
the troubles and the hardships they had gone through. I 
used to hear my father, may God have mercy on his soul! 
saying frequently that the worst of trades is the fishing 
because there is no hardship in the world worse than the 
hardship that follows it. He was a fisherman himself: and 
the old people who used to spend the evening with him were 
fishermen. I'm looking at them again, I think, and listening 
to them raising the sweet, tasty Gaelic. My father is again 
alive before me, describing the hardship. I see the sensible 
head being nodded, emphasizing his story to Maurice. 
Though he wasn't tall he was broad and strong and 
intelligent, and he was great at telling a story. 
'Yes, Maurice,' said he, on a certain night, when they 
were sitting by the fire. 'The proverb is true: "Don't spread 
your cloak any further than you can cover it." , 
'To what do you say that, Thomas?' said Maurice. 
'Because I saw a lot who spread their cloak far and fast, 
and they finished miserably afterwards. When I was living 
in Kilmacdowney, before I came here, I had a small bit 
of land. As you know, the Lady, Betty Rice, was the mistress 
over us and to tell the truth, she was good in a way, but 
she was the very devil in other ways. Her control was as 
fast and as firm over those who ,vere under her hand as 
the control of Queen Maeve of Connaught long ago. Any- 
thing she decided to do, there was no business going against 
her, especially for those under her control. If they went 
against her they were finished with land and tenancy. In 
the heel of the hunt the Lady decided to buy a big boat 
and bring it with her from Galway and she picked eight of 
the best men under her hand as a crew for the boat. 
McEligott was the Captain, and a clever man who was well 
used to the sea. She presented the boat to them only to 



50 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


obey her every time she would need the boat. I was a 
member of the team myself; she decided on me because 
I was hard and strong at that time. But alas! it's often I 
didn't boast about it because many a narrow escape I went 
through while I was following it. My blood shakes when I 
think of the hardship I went through.' 
'Ah, there's trouble and hardship following the fisher- 
men always,' said Maurice. 
'There is,' said my father, 'and they lose by it often, God 
help us. I remember well a year we were without any turf, 
because of the summer being bad. There was the draught 
of the world through the big house, and there must be firing 
in plenty there. One day the Lady decided to send us for a 
boat-load of turf to Iveragh. Though we had the unwilling- 
ness of the world, there was no business giving her a refusal. 
When we found the morning calm, and, as we thought, 
without any danger for crossing the Bay to Iveragh-' 
'Not coming before you in your speech,' said Maurice, 
'I suppose there's a good distance between Cahir Quay 
and Goleen?' 
'On my oath, there is, my boy, but we had a good boat 
and the sea calm. But as the proverb said "It's not the same 
to go to the King's house as to come from it". That's the 
way it was with us, because going in the mouth of Goleen, 
the wind turned and it wasn't long till storm and sea was 
exhausting us. But we were hard and strong and we rowed 
her with the dint of strength, besides the help of God. 
'We reached the harbour beyond, but we'd no great 
jubilation in us because we were exhausted from rowing; 
but since we had dry land now we thought nothing of it. 
There were welcoming, friendly people before us and they 
didn't let us lay the tip of a finger on the boat-they put 
her on a safe side themselves.' 
'There are good people in Iveragh always, it seems.' 



A Boat-Load of Turf 


51 


'It's there the best of men are,' said my father, 'not to 
mention the women. I couldn't criticize them anyway. 
When the boat was out of danger they were tearing us 
apart, trying to bring us to their own houses. But it was no 
use for them because Maurice O'Shea wouldn't let us go 
with anyone. He took us with him to his own house, and 
he didn't leave thirst or hunger or cold on us. Maurice 
had a generous welcoming house and it was hard for a 
wanderer to get by it. Although he had only a small bit of 
land and a nice comfortable thatched house he was living 
as satisfied as if he had wether and ducks; and of course 
he had a housewife if ever any poor man had. She had a 
vast generous heart and they had no want in life but one 
thing, that is, they had no one in family, but the Angel of 
Peace was between them, and that was a big thing. 
'We spent that night happily, but neither the following 
day nor the day after that was calm to go across and we 
were getting impatient. Another thing about it, we were 
ashamed to be pushing in on Maurice because he wouldn't 
let any man of us away from him. It's what he used to say: 
"Don't have any question on you, men! There's enough 
for twelve in my house, with no grudge. You'll want for 
nothing until you're able to go home." 
'On the morning of the second day, the weather was 
neither calm nor kind, but when we had eaten the morning 
meal, Lena, the woman of the house, said to her husband, 
Maurice: 
, "I'm going to Cahir today to visit my sister because 
she has a young baby, but don't you forget these men. Let 
them have no thirst nor hunger," said she. 
, "Musha, you are a good housewife, may God reward 
you for your work," said McEligott. 
, "Good man," said she, "God gave us all we have and 
ordered us to help the wanderer." 


E 



52 An Old Woman's Reflections 
'When she was ready to go, she turned on her heel. 
, "I hope you'll be happy together until I return," said 
she, and off she went. 
'But if she went, there was a good man in charge of the 
house, and he wasn't the wisp in the place of the brush. 
When he milked the cows he'd throw the milk in the cream- 
crock. There was a little hole in the crock with a bung stuck 
in it and it was often during the day that Lena was away 
from the house that Maurice drew the bung to give milk 
to the men, in case they'd be thirsty, and as he put the 
milk above in, so he'd draw it out below. 
'When Lena came home, and when she had the cows 
milked, she went to the crock with the milk but there wasn't 
a quart in the bottom of it. When she came in she was 
ch uckling. 
, "Not a drop of milk did you put in the crock since, 
Maurice," said she. 
'He looked at her, and said: "By the pipe of the white 
gander, Lena, the author of good deeds wouldn't put it up 
over the bung. As I'd put it in above, so I'd take it out 
below." 
, "You're a good man, and I like you now more than 
ever," said Lena, "God is good from today till tomorrow, 
and these men will be going home tomorrow \vith God's help." 
'It was true for her. The morrow was beautiful and the 
sea was calm and the boat \vasn't long being filled with turf. 
When \ve were ready we gave our hearty thanks to Maurice 
O'Shea and Lena, his wife. Then we set two sails on her 
and we had a nice following wind until we moved a good 
bit over from the mouth of Goleen. Then we noticed that 
the Bay wasn't as kind as we thought it was because a blast 
of wind came that made the sails rattle. 
, "I'm afraid, men, that we won't have over or hither 
now," said McEligott. "The boat is too deep and the sea 



A Boat-Load of Turf 


53 


is not too quiet. The wind is strengthening and the way is 
too long." 
, "And what have we to do?" said Sean Foley. 
, "As best we can, my boy," said McEligott. "The help 
of God and our own help. We haven't the second way out 
of it but to put the turf into the sea. If we don't do that 
there is no way the boat could run the sea and it swelling 
and rising already." 
'Well, as we worked on the turf: throwing it overboard, 
the boat was taking water and were it not for how hard 
we worked and how soon we had the boat empty, I don't 
think we would have reached land at all. 
'There wasn't a man or a woman, old or young, who 
wasn't out to Barque Point. Even the lady herself: Betty 
Rice, she was the person furthest out. She was sorry because 
it was herself had put us in danger. They could barely see 
the boat at all, because the sea was in white waves. But I 
suppose we were not to be drowned,' said my father. 'The 
Glorious King was in favour to us, because coming in for 
Barque Point a huge wave threw itself in on us without 
pity or mercy and swept with it Sean Foley. I myself saw 
him going west with his mouth wide open blowing brine in 
the sky and trying to catch a hold on the boat. I jumped 
up, because I didn't mind my death or my life from that 
moment. I stretched out as far as I could; I never strained 
myself as much. There wasn't in the boat of me only my 
two feet. By the grace of God I caught hold of the top of 
his head just when he was being swept down to the bottom. 
Two more of the crew came to my aid and we hauled him 
into the boat. The poor fellow was a bald-drowned mouse, but 
he didn't "mind since he was free again amongst the men.' 
, "Your pulse is my music, Thomas!" said McEligott. 
"That's a good deed you've done. I am sure we're from 
danger now, with God's help, because the Point is only 



54 An Old Woman's Reflections 
three boat lengths from us. Wasn't it a bad wave! It didn't 
leave a stick in the hand of any man of us." 
, "It didn't, or sense in anyone's head either," said Martin 
Big Ted. 
, "Don't say that, Martin," said McEligott. "Wasn't the 
sense good that stayed with Thomas Sayers ?" 
, "I don't care what sense stayed with Thomas. There 
didn't stay a spark of it in my head. I thought I was being 
swallowed to the floor of the sea." 
, "Aroo! and weren't we too, you silly?" said Pat Dermot. 
, "Musha, God bless my soul, Lord," said Sean Foley, 
"wouldn't I get the ugly death being eaten by the worms 
of the sea I"
 
, "I will to God that it was nearly not only you they'd 
have," said Martin. "But you are your own grief and 
nobody else, Sean." 
, "Ye may talk now," said McEligott, "but there wasn't 
a murmur out of any of you when you had the knock over 
the brain a moment ago." 
'In the midst of the turmoil what was I thinking on only 
the sermon the priest had, the Sunday before that, and he 
giving out about what happened to the boat on the Lake of 
Galilee long ago. That gave me courage because I knew that 
the same Law was looking down on ourselves and that we 
wouldn't be in danger. 
'When we reached Barque Point, exhausted and wet, 
Betty Rice was the first person to catch hold of the stern 
of the boat.' 
'I suppose she was frightened, and no wonder,' said 
Maurice, fixing himself on the chair. 
'She was, and especially because it was for herselfwe were 
working, but sharp alas! it is we were not grateful to her. 
As soon as I put the soles of my two feet on the dry land I 
swore black oaths that I wouldn't go into that boat as long 



A Boat-Load of Turf 


55 


as I lived again. She wasn't hard on me about it, because 
of the accident that happened to us, but it is said that the 
King never lost a man yet but he could get another in his 
place. On the morrow there was another man in my place 
and it's on me there was no sorrow about it. I thought at 
first that it wouldn't be so easy for me to give the refusal 
to the mistress, but when I eXplained the story from start 
to finish, she. admitted that I was right and she left with 
me my little patch of land. Everybody thought I'd be thrown 
out on the side of the road but it's not as is thought that 
things be. It is how she took great pity on me.' 
'It is said and it is true,' said Maurice, 'that after the 
oaths the women are best.' 
'That's true, Maurice,' said my father, and he poked the 
fire. 'She didn't flourish for long after that. A bout of 
sickness came on her and didn't part with her for two years 
until she died. I don't know from life how her worldly 
wealth went, but all of its signs today is the big flagstone 
that is over her grave in Ventry graveyard.' 
'The clock in the churchyard lives, but the hand that 
placed it there doesn't.' 
'Yes,' said my father, 'and woe to him who accepts defeat 
in case i t may be difficult for him to return.' 
Maurice got up and knocked the ash from his pipe. 
'You'd never tell me that it might be time for me to 
go home,' said he. 
'Indeed, Maurice, I only want your company. Don't you 
know we'll be long enough asleep. We'll soon have sleep 
without awakening, though we do our best.' 
That much was true for him. They're asleep now, may 
God grant them everlasting life, and to every dead soul! 
I am an old woman watching to go asleep in the same place, 
no one knows when, but may God smooth the long road 
for us all! 



CHAPTER NINE 


The Story of Betty Kelly's Son and his 
Bright Love 


On sitting here by the door three little boys ran west by 
me. There's another boy after them trying to catch up with 
them. They remind me of the time myself and Kate Jim 
were running down the road long ago. It was merry we 
were with the summer sun shining down on us. Down the 
road with us, Kate before me and I at an easy trot after 
her. 
The crossroad was full of people. Betty Kelly's son was 
there, after coming home from South America and the 
people of the parish were before him at the crossroad. 
Betty had only him, and as we know she held him in big 
esteem. The proverb didn't leave so much out-that 'Its 
own child is bright to the carrion crow.' 
The son wasn't long home when it happened to him that 
he fell in love with a fine handsome girl named Nance 
McDonagh. Isn't it queer that love makes a person blind? 
Because the same thing happened to Nance. The poor girl 
had no spark of sense after him and it was said by everyone 
that they'd make a fine couple. 
The game was on a long time before it reached Betty's 
ears, and the parish wasn't any the better for it when she 
heard it. She mixed Hell and God's Heavens. She spoke 
bad, hard, and bold to Nance McDonagh and told her 
that she was no equal for this Tim of hers, and she laid it 
down flat for her to finish with him. Poor Nance was in a 
fix and that talk lay greatly on her mind. It was worse it 



The Story of Betty Kelly's Son 


57 


lay on Tim, for next morning he wasn't on his bed or in 
the parish. The people of the hamlet thought he ha:d gone 
off his head and away with them looking for him. They 
didn't leave a cliff or cave from Ridge Head to Sheep 
Hollow unsearched for him, but his trace was not to be had. 
Betty was a great pity. She had no spark of sense, up on 
the fence and calling aloud on Tim to come home and 
she'd never say a bitter word again to him about 
Nance. 
But Tim was the length of her call from her. The police 
and the people of the parish were looking hard for him, 
but they failed. 
What goes long goes cold. Tim's memory was leaving 
the people's mind, but not so with poor Nance. His memory 
was as much alive in her head as ever it was. She would be 
in with Betty, and telling her that she couldn't let it into 
her mind that Tim had died. 
'What makes you so sure of that?' Betty would say with 
the tears in her eyes. 
'God, praise for ever to him, wouldn't allow such a bad 
end to Tim! He wouldn't, I say! He is still alive somewhere 
in the world.' 
'If he was alive, Nance, he'd write-but he's not! The 
years are slipping by without news from him. Isn't that two 
years gone already?' and a burst of grief came on her. 
Only for Nance McDonagh she would go out on the fence 
and sing her old lonesome dirge. Wasn't it often in the last 
year she was up on that fence with these words going: 


'My feet are burnt 
In blisters scalded 
From walking these long roads of the King, 
Seeking my treasure 
Of a musical boy 
Who had the bloom of the rose on his cheek. 



58 An Old Woman's Reflections 
Oh! love and bright pet 
How sad the story 
And I don't know where you go! 
You'll hear no call from me 
Or sound of my shout 
And you take no notice of my weeping eye! 


o loving boy 
Quiet, fresh, and gentle, 
Your laugh was nice, as was your glance, 
Who promised your mother 
To stay by her 
But it was the head of curls put you astray. 
And where is the damsel 
In forest or seclusion 
Could keep a nice quiet boy like you 
Who would leave her 
As you left me 
Who would not be lamenting and shedding tears ?' 


But Nance made her sit on the stool in the corner. 
'Nance,' said she one day, 'may God reward the graces 
on you! Only for you it's long ago I would be where the 
herring lives in his nest. If I understood the position that 
time as I do now, Tim wouldn't be away, and your heart 
broken as it is-and I'm the cause of it! But it's true that 
it's after every act it's understood.' 
'Have sense,' Nance would say. 'Isn't a duty on us all 
to carry our own crosses! God of Glory will shine the light 
amongst us yet. Tim will come home! Something is telling 
me he will.' 
'1 don't think, Nance, my treasure, that I'll ever hear 
again from him. That night I told him to have no more 
to do with you, up or down, he got in a passion. He didn't 
say "That's bad, mother," only dashed up to the room. In 
the morning he wasn't rising and I thought he was cross. 



The Story of Betty Kelly's Son 


59 


When I thought it long that he wasn't rising, I went up, 
but the bed was cold empty, and looking as though nobody 
had lain on it. The little window was unmoved. I looked 
around the room. Nothing was moved only his holiday 
clothes-there wasn't a tatter of them to be found. Nance, 
my treasure, that's the time the grip caught me. I called 
Tim but nobody heeded me. Kate, down here, was the first 
person who came and when she heard the story she started 
to sing her wailing. The whole hamlet was around us inside 
half an hour. I was brought in between people without my 
mind or anybody else's mind. When any glimpse of my 
mind came back to me, you were the first person I saw, 
with a cup of water in your hand.' 
'I was, surely,' said Nance. 'The other people panicked 
and nobody stayed with you only myself: I thought there 
wasn't a scrap of truth in it. I wouldn't let it into my mind 
that there was. God wouldn't do me such a wrong-I was 
too fond of Tim. If Tim was dead as many others believe, I 
wouldn't live. I'd play the hanging trick! But I say again 
that there's something telling me he'll return!' 
'But, Nance, it's well you know he doesn't live, only you 
consoling me. Tim is as dead as a stone-' 
'Listen! What's this, Betty? There's somebody coming.' 
'Who would be coming at this hour of the night? It was 
the wind did it.' 
'I suppose so,' said Nance. 'But I hear it again-some- 
body is coming!' 
'It's the wind shaking the trees, Nance. It's often before 
this the same noise startled me. I'd swear somebody would 
be coming, but that person never came.' 
'By my word, Betty, but I have sharper ears than that. 
I hear the person's footfall, he is there and he is coming 
up the path to the house. He'll be here immediately who- 
ever he is.' 



60 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


A knock comes to the door. Nance hops to the door and 
takes the bolt off it. A slender dark man puts his head in 
and the water falling in drops down on his face from the 
cap on his head. 
'It's not Tim,' said Nance, in her own mind, and that 
thought brought a sigh out of her heart. 
'God's blessing in here,' said the stranger. 
Nance draws back. 
'Who are you, please?' said she, and she looked at him 
inquisitively between the two eyes. 
'I am a man in the King's service,' said he. "Tis how I 
was sent here with a message, a letter I have here that was 
found in a bottle that was floating with the tide. I was told 
to take it to this woman. The guards said it was her son 
wrote it a couple of years ago.' 
'And where did they get the bottle that that letter was 
in, good man?' said Nance. 
'It's hard to say. Some sea-faring people picked it up, I 
suppose. ' 
'You are a good messenger,' said Nance. 'See now, Betty, 
what did I tell you?' 
'What's that man saying, Nance? I don't understand a 
word from him. You have English, tell me what he says.' 
'He has good news. A letter from Tim he brought to us.' 
'A letter from Tim! What's that you're saying?' 
'He says it was in a bottle the letter was found and that 
it was your son Tim who wrote it, a couple of years ago.' 
'Oh! I don't know will I believe my ears,' said she. 'Is 
this a dream or can it come true?' and she thought to get 
out on the fence and sing that lonesome dirge. But Nance 
turned her away and put her sitting on the little stool in 
the corner. 
'Have sense,' she said, 'God's help is nearer than the 
door. ' 



The Story of Betty Kelly's Son 


61 


'Oh! Nance, make attendance on this good man who 
brought us the good news! Hang the kettle quickly and 
make a cup of tea for him.' 
Then Nance hung the kettle and it wasn't long until the 
tea was ready. The wanderer drank a couple of cups of tea, 
for he had need of it. Then he went out. 
Nance opened the letter and read it aloud, because Betty 
was a little bit deaf. 
'Dear Mother, you did me wrong,' she read. 'If you saw 
the hardship I'm in you'd never forgive yourself. But it's 
hard to say that this letter will ever reach you. I am here 
now in a small boat and no ground or land within forty 
miles of me. I have nothing to see in any direction I look 
but the sea and the brilliant stars above me
 The ship sank 
and we had to take to the boats. I didn't think, Mother, 
when I left you, that such disaster would catch me. This 
morning a man of our team died and we had to throw him 
overboard. There are now only six of us and even one of 
those is failing. There is nothing threatening us more than 
the thirst. The captain is entreating us not to dare drink 
the brine. He says we are near the hot countries, but 'tis 
how the poor man is giving us courage. If this letter reaches 
you, Mother, I am asking one thing of you, before I'm 
swallowed to the bottom, to be fond of poor Nance for my 
sake. This is like a letter from the grave, dear Mother, but 
there's only one chance in a thousand that it will reach you, 
but I'll meet you again among the dead, with God's help. 
I am your fond son, 
Tim.' 
'Read it again, Nance,' said Betty. 'I like fine to be 
listening to you reading it.' 
Nance read the letter again. 
'Yes, Betty,' said she, 'I told you Tim wasn't after 
dying !' 



62 An Old Woman's Reflections 
'Musha, Nance, my pet, I have little delusion but that 
the poor man is on the way of eternity long ago.' 
'He's not at all; 'tis how the little boat was thrown in 
on some shore far from home. Maybe 'tis how Tim was 
exhausted and he's in some hospital in faraway places. 
Have your hope in God! That letter gave me great courage. 
We'll have better news before long. Go to sleep now and 
sleep soundly. Tim is out of danger. I'll go home.' 
'Whisper,' said Betty, 'don't stay away from me at all, 
but come and visit me always.' 
'Don't be afraid,' said Nance, and she went. 
Time was slipping by and the friendship between Betty 
and Nance was growing. People wondered at the love the 
two always had for each other, but that was a secret be- 
tween the two themselves. But it was said that whatever 
trick Nance had played on Betty she was going to present 
the little farm to her and any young man she'd lay her eye 
on. But poor Nance's eye was west over the wild seas always 
and for ever until the day the gathering was at the cross- 
road. 
All the people of the parish were there and because they 
were, Kate Jim urged me along with her. When we went 
west, Betty was standing amongst the people as grey as a 
mouse and Nance standing beside her looking very con- 
fused. Tim Betty was a pillar of a nobleman, not speaking 
a word of Gaelic. Myself and Kate Jim went up to Betty's 
house and we had a great day. Soon after that Tim and 
Nance were married. 
Nance was right when she told Betty that Tim was out 
of danger. What Tim himself said was that it was likely 
that Nance got the award for her prayer. 'Because,' he said, 
'approaching the banks of Newfoundland, the greatest squall 
of wind I ever saw came upon us. The sea increased and 
swelled until the ghost of a big mountain was in every 



The Story of Betty Kelly's Son 


63 


green-sided wave of it. The waves were beating so strongly 
on our ship that the cargo shifted in her. A little boy ran 
into the cabin where I was and the fear of death on him. 
"Oh! God with my soul!" said he, "the ship is in small 
bits. The water is coming up through the floor of the ship. 
She'll go under! She'll go under!" said he and he went. 
I didn't understand at first, however, what sense the little 
boy had with the talk, but it was shortly after that I found 
out. Because I was only settled in the little boat when the 
big ship was swallowed down before our sight. 
'We stayed that night being thrown from wave to wave 
and in the morning there was no boat or ship to be seen, 
that would come in any aid to us. The only hope we had 
then was that maybe in the granting of God, some ship 
would come the way that would pick us up and out of 
our predicament. But it was the spit for the venison and 
the deer not yet killed. On the third morning there was a 
man of our team failing. "Oh!" said he, "If I can't quench 
my thirst I'll die! My tongue is withered in my head," and 
he bent down and drank the brine. But if he did, the brine 
killed him. Then the captain told us not to drink the brine 
any more, however we'd fare. On the morning of the fourth 
day we hadn't ground or land to see. Another man of our 
team shouted and said that he was finished; "I couldn't put 
up with it," said he, and he gave one jump out into the sea. 
He sent the brine in splashes in the sky. He spent a little 
while struggling in the water and then he went down. 
'As the sun was setting that evening I felt my strength 
failing me. There was some weakness coming on my heart. 
I knew my time was spent, but before I fell I heard the 
captain saying there was some land near us, where the 
lights were clearly to be seen, but I remembered no more. 
When I came to myself again, where I was was in the big 
hospital in Buenos Aires. I must admit that the captain did 



64 An Old Woman's Reflections 
a noble deed for me, may God repay him for his toil! He 
put a good nurse attending to me. And only for the good 
attention I got, I suppose I wouldn't be alive today. It 
wasn't long until I was able to walk in and out for myself 
again. One day when I was going to work who should I 
meet but a lad from Dingle. We got acquainted. He told 
me all that had happened since I left Ireland. He told me 
about the friendship between you and Nance, and that you 
were going to present the small farm to her and any man 
she'd lay her eye on. When I heard him say that much, I 
admit it moved me greatly. I said to myself that nobody 
would have Nance as long as strength and pluck would be 
in my limbs, that I would go and earn enough to bring me 
home to Ireland, and when everything was ready, I 
travelled and I came to rest here, myself and Nance.' 
'Musha, may God award the luck down on yourself and 
Nance!' said Betty. 'Soon I'll be leaving ye, but I'll die 
happily now seeing you both together again.' 
It was soon after that Betty was called from this life, but 
many a merry evening myself and Kate Jim had with Nance 
McDonagh afterwards. 



CHAPTER TEN 


Wethers) Well Pilgrimage)" a Pagan and 
the Wethers,. the Overcoat 


'Would you go on the pilgrimage, Peig?' said Big Kate 
to me one evening in the end of June, as I was going to 
the well to fetch a bucket of water. 
'What pilgrimage, Kate?' said I. 
'Wethers' Well pilgrimage,' said she. 'A lot of the people 
of the island are going there and we'll have great company.' 
'Och, my grief,' said I, 'that place is too far from home.' 
'It's not, indeed,' said Kate. 'Don't people go farther 
from home than it? I was there long ago ,vhen I was a 
little girl, with my mother, and I have decided to go there 
this year and I'd like you to be along with me. One person 
is no good, but a pair is company.' 
'Indeed, I'd love to be with ye, and I will, with God's 
help, if possible,' said I. A couple of days after that I met 
her again. 
'Musha, Kate, since they're all going there, I won't break 
the company; I'll go with you. But when will ye be going 
there ?' 
'St. Peter and Paul Day is the right day for the pilgrimage, 
but we would have to be in Dingle the night before because 
the train will be going early. Be ready in the morning,' 
said she. 
'All right,' said I, 'it's a day of my life, nobody knows 
who'll live,' and I went to fetch the water. 
Tomorrow morning many of the people of the island 
were preparing themselves for the road. When I was ready 



66 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


I made down for the shore. There was noise there before, 
before me, oars and canoes being put down, a man with 
the thole-pins, another man with the oars, and another 
man with a little white bag on his back. And what a din 
they had! There were eighteen persons of us going on the 
pilgrimage. I myself was in the canoe when Kate came. 
She made a fine wide shout of a musical laugh up from the 
bottom of her heart when she saw the driving that they had. 
'By my baptism, men,' said she, 'but we're busy, it seems. 
We'll not be lonely, with the help of God, certainly.' 
The sea was fine and quiet and the canoes were besting 
each other. The sea was broken by the eternal dipping of 
the oars. There was a path of white foam after them. You'd 
hear now and again a boasting shout from a man when a 
canoe would creep up a little by another. 
'Indeed,' said Kate to myself: 'a person would think there 
was a big bet down, so hard they are going-or why all the 
contending ?' 
'Oh! did you never hear, Kate, that Youth is mad?' 
said I. 'They have the youth and the courage and the great 
humour that's on them is urging them. They are decided 
to have the day of sport, because it's not always the lads of 
the island have a day like that.' 
'On my soul,' said Kate, 'but the old people are merrier 
than them. Don't you see how airy Michael is! His heart is as 
ligh t as a thrush.' 
'It is, and there's nobody in the company heartier than 
he,' said I. 
'This is a wonderful charge of rowing,' said Big Owen. 
'Arragh! listen, man, she was never driven so since a nail 
was hammered into her,' said Sean Owen, 'but she'd do as 
much again if those two delaying women weren't in her.' 
'You'll show the effect of it, Sean,' said Kate, 'you won't 
be thirsty when we get to Dingle.' 



Wethers' Well Pilgrimage 


67 


'On my soul, but that's ever your nature, Kate!' said 
Sean, and he bent his oars. 
I was looking west from me at Grey Top at that time, 
and at the Blaskets. The air was so blue over me that you'd 
think it had just been painted by some painter. The brown 
heather was on the top of the peaks west from me between 
me and the bottom of the sky and over and hither there 
was a small patch of green to be seen, the small steady 
houses on the edge of the cliff and a little barren hill-crest 
above them. Its golden summit ,vas as a shelter from the 
threatening wind that blows across the gap. 
Anyone who would be where I was that day and who 
would look into life, he would have something to think 
about. He would have compassion for the poor people who 
are living on such a stump from the sea, trying to make a 
living there. But I hadn't much of my life spent yet. Less 
had I much understanding of life and there was nothing to 
be done but to take the easy end of the matter. 
'Wouldn't you be talking, Peig?' said Kate. 'What are 
you thinking about?' 
'That lovely view that's before me I am seeing,' said I. 
'Isn't it a fine thing to be on the sea on a calm day!' 
'You are right, Peig,' said Big Owen, 'it's a fine thing to 
be on the sea, but the small of your back not to be paying 
for it.' 
'And as we know, Owen,' said I, 'all the hurry wasn't 
needed. Wouldn't ye take it easy? Don't you know that the 
women have their own duties? Is it how you'd think to 
put us rowing?' 
'I leave in my will to God that there was never much 
good in your likes only the talk you have! Do you hear 
this, Kate?' 
When we went to Cliff Top, there was a party of us there 
and we were all talking and listening to each other as is 


F 



-. 


68 An Old Woman's Reflections 
usual with the people of the island. At last Sean Owen 
spoke out loud. 
'What misfortune is keeping ye there? Isn't there a long 
road ahead of us yet? Isn't it many a step from here to 
Dingle ?' 
'It's many, musha, Sean,' said Big Kate, answering him, 
'and there won't be much liveliness in the women when we 
reach the place, below.' 
'There's a great fear of ye,' said Owen. 'It's a long time 
before this since much walking was got from your legs.' 
Kate stretched herself and tightened her shawl around 
her. If she was middle-aged itself: she was nice and hard. 
'Come on over east,' said she to me. 'Mary Keating will 
make a cup of tea for us, and it will do us good for the road.' 
'Here it's with you,' said I. 
When we came into Mary's house, you'd think it was 
down from the sky we had fallen to her. 
'Going on the pilgrimage ye are, I suppose,' said she. 
'Yes, musha,' said Kate, 'it's how we came over here so 
that you'd make a cup of tea for us if you don't mind.' 
'I don't, certainly,' said Mary. 'The kettle is boiling and 
you won't have much delay.' 
We had the tea only just on the table when Sean Owen 
came in the door. 
'Out of your bodies be it,' said Sean, 'if it's not good to 
yourselves you are!' 
'Don't be talking,' said Kate, 'but sit here and have your 
own mouth's desire of it.' 
'He may as well,' said Mary, 'it's the same thanks he'll 
get. ' 
'Musha,' said Sean, 'what goes on, runs. I may as well 
have a drop of it. The same tea is a wonderful herb.' 
'Sean, my pet,' said Mary, 'didn't you hear that the Lord 
God long ago said that an herb would grow through the 



Wethers' Well Pilgrimage 


69 


ground and that that herb would be more in the mouths 
of people than Himself?' 
'Praise for ever to His glorious name!' said Sean, and he 
took his hat off his head. 'But, Mary, what about the 
tobacco ?' 
'Musha, the way the matter is, Sean, is that the people 
are worn away to the bone for it. But you'd get a person 
who'd refuse tobacco, but there's nobody alive would turn 
the back of his hand to a cup of tea.' 
'On my speckled oath, but you've beaten me again,' said 
Sean. 'But if your appetite for tea is as great as mine for 
tobacco, I don't rely on your luck.' 
'The King of Powers knows, my pet, that it's together I 
prefer them,' said Mary. 
'Yes, this won't do,' said Sean. 'Women, it's as well for 
us to be moving,' and he put an ember of fire on his pipe 
and we went out together. The rest of the people of the 
island were out the Hollows before us but we caught up 
with them on the long road down, and I'm telling you that 
we weren't lonely as long as Sean Owen was with us. He 
was a fine chatty man, and a good man, too. 
Joseph O'Shea's house was the first tavern we met. 
'In here with ye, men,' said Big Kate, 'I promised Sean 
Owen this morning that he'd have a drink when he'd reach 
Dingle and I may as well fulfil my promise, but 'tis no 
work to make flesh of one person and fish of another.' 
'My soul, Kate,' said Owen, 'but there's high fussing on 
you, but the big heart must have its way.' 
It was a sister of Kate's was married to Owen, and that 
made them very great with each other. 
'It's as well to obey her,' said Sean, 'there's no use giving 
her a refusal.' 
'Indeed,' said Michael, 'but ye are more inclined to go 
in than ye will be to come out, but as it's a thing that's said, 



7 0 


An Old Woman's R
flections 


"A house by the roadside is not a journey, but a short-cut", 
here it is with ye.' 
In with us and we sat at a table that was in the room. 
Big Kate came with a gallon of porter-it was easy to buy 
a gallon of porter at that time. She put it down in front of 
Sean Owen on the table. 
'Share that out to the company, Sean,' said she, 'for the 
goose's beak is not longer than the gander's. Everyone in 
this company is dear to me.' 
'Will you have a drop, yourself, Kate?' said Sean. 
'I won't, my treasure,' said she. 'The women prefer the 
hot drop. Myself and Peig will have a half-glass.' 
We drank the half-glass, and then myself and Kate went 
out. It was late enough then and we had to get our lodgings 
for the night. 
'Where will we go, Kate?' said I. 
'We'll go east to the carpenter's house,' said she, 'because 
it's there I stay every night I'm in Dingle.' 
We went east and when we went in Brigid, the woman of 
the house, was standing in the shop, and she put a hundred 
welcomes before us. 
'You have arrived from west,' said she. 'Did more of ye 
come ?' 
'There did, by my soul,' said Kate, 'and a party.' 
'For the pilgrimage, I suppose?' said Brigid. 
'Oh! Yes! what else?' said Kate 'We're tired out from 
the road. Come on in to the kitchen,' said she to myself. 
We went back to the kitchen and Brigid followed us. 
'Throw off your shawls! I suppose it's nowhere else you'll 
go tonight again?' said Brigid. 
'Musha, no. Our feet are blistered with the road,' said 
Kate. 
'I suppose so, my pet,' said Brigid, and she went from us 
out to the shop. 



Wethers' Well Pilgrimage 


7 1 


We weren't long sitting when a middle-aged woman came 
down the stair and came into the kitchen. 
'Welcome, women of the island!' said she. 
'May you live long, Joan,' said Kate, 'how are you 
spending life these times?' 
'Musha, weak, sound and thin,' said Joan. 'It's not im- 
proving but failing we'll be each day. Age creeps up on 
everyone, and it's not always a person can be as he wishes.' 
She drew to her a little stool by the fire. 
'On my soul,' said Kate, 'you have it nicely.' 
'This is my own stool. I don't be looking for a seat from 
anybody,' said she. 
'It's a proverb,' said Kate, '''If you go to a wedding 
uninvited, bring with you a stool to sit on"!' 
'That's just how it is with me,' said Joan. "Tis how I 
have a while here and a while there and wherever I stay I 
bring my stool with me.' 
'Musha, a cause to laugh for us!' said Kate, 'Tim of 
Dingle is in a hundred places.' 
Joan was a countrywoman and she had to leave her own 
house because she and her son's wife didn't agree together. 
She had pence of money, and she was paying for a small 
room in the carpenter's house. She was a nice chatty 
woman and many a thing she talked about. 
She wasn't long sitting when she produced her white clay 
pipe and started to put tobacco in it. 
'Do you smoke tobacco, island woman ?' said she to Kate. 
'Musha, my pet, great is my appetite for it,' said Kate, 
'but with the contending I had on me this morning I forgot 
my pipe at home. But as we know, I have no excuse now. 
Can't I get them, both tobacco and pipe here?' 
'Yes, definitely,' said Joan, 'you'll want for nothing here 
if you have money in your pocket, but if you haven't got 
that you'll be often short,' and she reached her pipe to 


... 



7 2 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


Kate; and on my soul it was the hiding in the fool's hand 
the pipe being given to Kate, because she took smoke out 
of it. After a little while I asked Joan a question. 
'Do you know, old woman, with what saint or woman 
saint is the Wethers' Well pilgrimage connected?' 
'Musha, certainly, that's a thing I don't know, but I'll 
tell you what I heard about it. 'Tis how there was a goodly 
rich man living in that place. He was a pagan, and he had 
good tract of land, but he wanted to protect the field the 
pilgrimage is in now for meadow. He had a protecting fence 
around the field so that no animal could cross, but he 
noticed the field was being bared and the grass being eaten. 
He became suspicious of his servant boy, that he was giving 
the grazing of the field to someone else, unknown to him. 
He questioned the boy but the boy gave denial in the matter. 
He said he had nothing to do with anything of the sort. 
"All right," said the pagan, "the field must be watched. 
Something is baring the grass. You'll have to go and watch 
the field tonight, and you'll know what's doing it." "All 
right," said the boy. 
'When the night came the poor boy went and settled 
himself in the corner of the field. He wasn't long there when 
he heard the grass being pulled and some animals grazing, 
but he couldn't see anything. He'd think he should see 
something, but he didn't. He walked all around the field. 
He'd hear the noise but he couldn't see anything. On to- 
morrow's morning he told the master what happened to him 
the night before. "You fool," said the master, "I knew it 
was a wrong to trust in you doing watching like that. But I 
won't be depending on you, I'll go there myself tonight." 
"All right," said the boy, "the fox never sent anyone better 
than himself out. Maybe you'll succeed in seeing things 
better than I did." 
'The night that was coming, the pagan took with him in 



Wethers' Well Pilgrimage 73 
his hand a hard blackthorn stick and called the boy with 
him. When they reached the field, one of them went into 
hiding in the bottom of the field and other at the top. In 
the dead time of night the eating started near the place 
where the pagan was in hiding. He leapt out from the side 
of the fence, to find out what was eating the grass. He saw 
the three white wethers in their wool, he thought. Here he 
goes after them. They did the round of the field but he 
couldn't catch up with them. He shouted out "loud to the 
boy to come and help him, but the boy couldn't see a sheep 
or a wether or a lamb. The master was cornering them ever 
and forever until he had them in the middle of the field 
and he thought they were tired out, and he gave a running 
charge to catch one of them. But he didn't succeed, because 
the three wethers put down their heads and went down 
through the ground in front of his two eyes. As we know 
panic and terror came on him, and he moved over to where 
they disappeared from his sight. He could see no trace of 
them, but he could see another thing, that is the spring 
well and the three round stones like stones of the shore, 
settled around the well. He became terrified and he called 
the boy. "Did you see anything?" said the master when 
the boy came to him. "I didn't see anything only yourself 
going around the field, and 'tis how I thought you had left 
your senses. Was it something you saw yourself?" "Yes, 
certainly," said the master, "and as you're a Christian can 
you give me any explanation for what I saw tonight?" 
Then he started to tell the boy what he saw and how the 
wethers went down through the ground when he threw the 
stick he had in his hand at them. "And now," said he, "I 
have no trace of it to see only that waterwell that wasn't 
there before." "It's a wonderful thing," said the boy, "but 
it's our parish priest would best explain it to you." "All 
right, boy. Come on home, we'll have enough tiIne to think 



74 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


in the morning." Next day he sent the boy to the priest to 
tell him the story. When the priest heard that story from 
the boy he told him to tell his master that he'd like to have 
a little talk with him. 
'The pagan had no hesitation, because what he had seen 
put great fear on him. The end of the story was,' said Joan, 
'that the priest baptized the pagan and his household at 
the well. The Church blessed the place after that. On St. 
Peter and Paul day they were baptized and the pilgrimage 
was consecrated for that day, and the big crowds from far 
and near are making the pilgrimage ever since, and that's 
why, my pet, it's called the pilgrimage of Wethers' Well.' 
Next morning, at dawn of day, we were up and everyone 
at his best to reach the station. 0 person of my heart, there 
were some of us who never saw a train before and we made 
great wonder of it. There were a lot of people gathered 
there, because the train wasn't going yet. They were from 
north and south there. The people of the island would like 
to be in one carriage, because where one of them would 
like to be was where the others would like to be. We were 
standing near the train, and pooling our advice. It was Big 
Owen O'Sullivan 1 was our leader. He was a fine well- 
standing man that day. 
'We didn't need all the hurry, men,' said Sean. 'I don't 
know how long more we'll be here?' 
'Not long,' said a man from Dingle. 'You must be going 
in, because the train will be going in a couple of minutes.' 
In with us on the train, and we seated ourselves. There were 
a lot of people with us in it. We barely had room on the seats. 
When we reached Tralee station the train stopped. A man 
came to us for tickets and as he'd get a ticket he'd cut a 
small gap out of it, and give it back to us. 


1 'Grandfather' in Maurice O'Sullivan's book. See Twenty Tears 
a-Growing. 



Wethers' Well Pilgrimage 


75 


We went together out of the train. 
'Yes, men,' said Sean Owen, cleaning the dust of the 
carriage from his clothes, 'what's to be done?' 
'What's to be done only to be packing ahead?' said 
Michael. 'Haven't we the width of our feet of the dry land 
of Ireland. If we're going west awhile we haven't but to 
turn and then take the other way; the day is long and it's 
with ourselves we'll be spending it.' 
'If I had drunk a couple pints of porter,' said Big Owen, 
'I wouldn't mind whether 'twould be east or west we'd 
be going.' 
'Come with me,' said Big Kate, 'I know Mary Brosnahan, 
she's an old friend of mine, since she used to stay in Dingle. 
I don't know what part of the Town she's in, but if I found 
somebody who \vould direct us to the house. . .' 
At that, a little boy came the way and I spoke to him in 
broken English, and asked him, if it were his will, to show 
us Kate Brosnahan's house. 
'It is,' said he, and he went down the street before us. 
When we reached the house, Owen put his hand in his 
pocket and gave a sixpence to the little boy for sweets. 
As soon as the woman of the house saw Big Kate she put 
hundreds of\velcomes before her, and before us all because 
she had the best of acquaintance with a good many people 
of the island. 
'Be seated! Ye'll have a good drink, I suppose,' said she. 
'We will, but we have no business in being slow,' said 
Owen, 'because we'll have to be ready for the train this 
evening, and if you could arrange any coach that would 
take us to the pilgrimage, we'd have plenty of time.' 
'I can, certainly,' said she. 'I have one of them myself 
that will take ye out and back together.' 
'Thank you, woman of the house, the matter is right, 
then,' said Owen. 



7 6 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


It was a long coach, a two-horse coach. We sat in, nine 
on each side. 
'My soul from the Devil,' said Sean, 'but we're having a 
great time, if the end of it is not looking for charity.' 
'Ifitis itself: it's merry work,' said Michael, answering him. 
'Dear men,' said Owen, 'we'll be only a time in this life, and 
don't ye know that it's your folly if you don't borrow from it.' 
'Arrah! Owen, it's not today this gayness will be regretted, 
but when we'll go home.' 
'Listen, you fool,' said Michael, and his hat raised up, 
'you'll be dead and nobody will say God's blessing with 
your soul. Cast it up to yourself: man. A day will come on 
you and on me when we won't be able to come on Wethers' 
Well Pilgrimage.' 
'I suppose you're right, Michael,' said Sean, and he 
started to put tobacco in his pipe. 
I t wasn't long until we reached the pilgrimage field. The 
crowds were there, a party coming and a party going. I 
myself didn't forget the little story that Joan was telling us 
last night before that, because I noticed everything around 
the field and especially the well and the wethers, as they 
say. I thought in my mind that many lives had gone since 
the pagan was there. 
As soon as we had finished the pilgrimage, we hopped 
into the coach and while you'd be saying 'one, two, three', 
we were at the inn. There was food ready there before us 
and people in waiting busy, because it was not only the 
people of the island who were eating there that day. There 
was a long roomy table in the middle of the room and seats 
around it, and as for other things that have to do with 
dinner, they ,vere on the table. 
We were eating and talking, because we were hungry 
enough, but the bread was eaten and we weren't half- 
satisfied. 



Wethers' Well Pilgrimage 


77 


'On my baptism,' said Sean, 'the bread is eaten and we 
haven't half enough.' 
'Speak to the girl, Sean, and tell her to bring us more 
bread,' said Michael. 
But though he did, 'twas small heed the girl paid him. 
She didn't know but it was Latin he spoke. 'Tis how she 
giggled and went away. But the girl wasn't coming and we 
were waiting. She was busy waiting on other people. They 
had Nonie down and Nonie up and she answering them at 
her best. At last Thomas stood up and spoke aloud: 'MORE 
BREAD, NONIE,' said he. In a minute she was to us with an 
armful of bread. 
'Yes, Sean, is the English good?' said Thomas. 'If you 
knew that much we wouldn't be waiting so long.' 
'On my speckled oath,' said Sean, 'but you have me hit 
in the eye.' 
'Did ye ever hear,' said Owen, 'that the ebbtide waits not 
for noon, and no less than that will the train wait for us. 
This is not the Island ye have, where the canoe will wait 
for ye until ye are ready.' 
That made us anxious and everyone was at his best to get 
to the station. When we reached it you'd think nobody ever 
died, there were so many people there. .Every carriage was 
full. 
'Come into this carriage,' said Kate, 'we surely must find 
room somewhere.' When we went in a wren wouldn't find 
room on any of the seats, but there was a place where an 
overcoat was stretched the length of the seat. 
'What about the overcoat, Kate,' said I, 'isn't there room 
for three under it?' 
'I don't know in life, my treasure,' said she, 'I suppose 
it's somebody put it there to keep room.' 
'If so, musha,' said I, 'it will keep only his own place, 
whoever it belongs to.' 



78 An Old Woman's Reflections 
1 caught the overcoat and 1 folded it and 1 planked it 
down on the seat with so much room under it that if it was 
the devil himself he'd have enough room. Then Kate and 
1 sat on what was left of the seat. We were squashed enough 
but it was better than to be standing. But after a couple of 
minutes two men came into the box. One of them was a 
nice middle-aged man from Dingle and the other a big fat 
strong man who had a basketful of a stomach. A watch in 
his pocket and a yellow chain across and the appearance 
on him that he was a fine gentleman. He stood in front of 
us and asked in English who folded his overcoat like that. 
Nobody answered him. Then the Dingle man spoke In 
Gaelic and asked who moved this good man's coat. 
, 'Twas I moved it, good man,' said I. 
'Where did you find it in yourself to do the like?' said he, 
and anger in his voice. 
'Because 1 understood the overcoat to belong to one 
person and that by right it deserved only one man's spàce, 
and if you haven't your entitled space, righteous man, I 
will leave this place to you. Though there's good bulk in 
you, I think you have enough room, because I have bought 
this seat as well as you. There was no bad penny in my 
money when 1 paid for it.' 
'Didn't you always hear,' said the Dingle man to the fat 
hulk, 'that nobody ever got the better of women?' 
'I did,' said the big man, 'and it's true.' 
'Sit here on my knee,' said the Dingle man, 'we'll have 
every second turn.' 
There was no more talk about the overcoat, but that 
didn't leave us without company because Michael and more 
of the people of the island were at one end of the carriage, 
his hat on his knee, singing. 'Dark Woman's Slope', he was 
at, and he taking an echo out of the carriage. I was looking 
out through the window at the little hamlets and green 



Wethers' Well Pilgrimage 


79 


plains, for it was my first time ever on a train-and the 
last, because I was never on a train since. 
I noticed the little hamlets and at the same time giving 
ear to Michael who was in a merry mood at the head of 
the carriage. Over and hither, there would be people in 
the fields. Whatever they were doing, you'd think the train 
would startle them because you'd see the fine healthy red 
faces, and the sign of sustenance on them, looking in at you 
through the windows of the train; but before there'd be a 
clear sight of them you'd be rushed away again like the 
wind. There was nothing ever resembled them but cor- 
morants bobbing up after shooting at them. 
It wasn't long until the man of the overcoat had enough 
room. As the train was moving west a person was leaving it 
until we reached Dingle. Everyone was busy then getting 
to his own house. We had little delay to make in Dingle 
and as the evening was fine and the sea calm we did our 
best to get home. It was a lovely night, the air was clean, 
full of brilliant stars and the moon shining on the sea. From 
time to time a sea-bird would give a cry. Inside in the black 
caves where the moon was not shining the seals were 
lamenting to themselves. I would hear, too, the murmuring 
of the sea running in and out through the clefts of the stones 
and the music of the oars cleaving the sea across to Ventry. 
'My soul from the devil,' said Sean Owen, and he put so 
much strength into that much speech, that he startled me, 
'is there anyone here who will sing up my praise-song?' 
'I am here,' said Michael, and he started to sing the words: 
'Did ye hear account of the nice BEAUTY of the island? 
She drew fame with a crew of good men on the shore; 
When they were let go on the long course of the shore 
They were in the evening as exhausted as race-horses.' 
And he continued long, soft and sweet. When the crew of 
the other canoe that was a small distance in front of us 



80 An Old Woman's Reflections 
heard him, they didn't let it go to him. They were into 
competition and nobody knew who was the best howler. 
The proverb says, and it's true, that a good story-bringer 
in a house is no better than a bad one. But it's not over my 
saying it, Michael was the sweetest singer I ever heard. 
When he had the song sung, Sean Owen drew up a snipe 
of a bottle from a little white bag that was near him. 
'Here, son of a good mother, quench your thirst with this,' 
said he. Michael caught the bottle and took a flowing drink 
from it. The bottle was not put by. Before it parted with 
them there wasn't a drop in the bottom of it. It's out in 
the sea Sean Owen threw it. 
We weren't long coming home, and it was for long after 
that there was remembrance of the Wethers' Well Pil- 
grImage. 



CHAPTER ELEVEN 


How the Fish was Stolen from Old Kate 
and how Herself ate some of it 


A couple of days after the Pilgrimage I met my man, Sean 
Owen. 
'My soul from the devil,' said he to me, 'wasn't it I 
acted the rake that day! I spent all I had in the world, 
woman of my heart, and the mistress is mad with me since. 
She didn't even speak a kind word to me. 'Tis how she 
does have a wallop at the cat and a wallop at the dog. 
She has me in the goat's horns. Whatever pricked me to 
go to the same pilgrimage I didn't bring much of the grace 
of God home with me! I'm telling you, little woman, that 
it was the unfortunate pilgrimage for me. If everybody who 
was on the pilgrimage is being persecuted as I am they 
won't feel like going on Wethers' Well pilgrimage ever 
again. ' 
'Musha, Sean, you have only to give them the deaf ear. 
That much will go in the sky with the wind, and it's a good 
thing the money was in your pocket. Didn't you ever hear 
that a big-hearted man in a big town is a pity without 
money in his pocket? .Y ou are not a played-out man yet. 
But you remind me of a fine spring evening long ago when 
I was listening to Nora Paddy. She had the same grousing 
at her husband, James Patrick. He was after coming home 
from Dingle, and he had drunk a drop-and by the way a 
woman's tongue is a thing that doesn't rust. He got the 
tongue from Nora, and got it black, because he had brought 
her no piece of sauce for the Fitzgerald who was coming to 



82 An Old Woman's Reflections 
plough for them the next day. She had him tormented with 
eternal grumbling. 
, "In the name of God, woman," said] ames, "stop now 1 
As we know, I never remembered that you or the Fitz- 
gerald were alive. But go you west to Old Kate and you'll 
get a couple of fish to borrow from her." 
, "On my soul," said Nora, "but 'tis sooner Old Kate 
would part with the eye, than with any fish. Fish is scarce 
and the poor creature herself has only a little." 
, "And aren't there two tellings on every story and two 
sides on every page?" said he. "Wouldn't you try the crow's 
trick on her? If you can do it anyhow, we'll have a chance 
to repay her, please God." 
, "On my soul, ]ames," said Nora, "isn't it harder to 
steal her temple from the wasp than sneak up on Old Kate 
to take any fish from her. She is watching them like the cat 
would be watching the mouse. I don't think the grey crow 
himself could trick her. But I'll have a try at her anyway." 
'Old Kate was sitting by the fence sunning a small lot 
offish on the fence, and if her hut went on fire she wouldn't 
leave the fence, for watching the fish, and it would be hard 
for anyone to come near it unknown to her. But well as 
she was watching, Nora got a chance on her. She sneaked 
down into the bottom of the garden which was full of 
bushes and jungle so that a person would think the cat 
itself couldn't pass among them. She slid on up to the fence 
and put her hand up where the fish was, and swiped three 
fishes without Old Kate seeing her. Then she slid away the 
same way like an eel. 
'When she came to the house, with the fish,] ames was there. 
, "By my palms," said he, "but there are people as bad 
as Frawley1 alive 1 That's the quickest theft anyone ever 
did! But Old Kate will have to be repaid I" 
1 A famous robber. 



How the Fish was Stolen 


83 


'''It's a small danger that I'd have anything of Old 
Kate's, only I was in a spot. I wouldn't like the Fitzgerald 
to have unflavoured food. A person has a desire for fish in 
the spring." 
'\Vhen Old Kate arose and looked around her, she 
noticed that three small fishes '\Nere gone without trace. 
Then it was that she had the history and the cursing. 
, "Breaking and bruising of bones on the one who took 
them!" said she, but many a laugh she had afterwards 
when Nora was telling her about the scraping and scratching 
she got among the bushes trying to take them with her.' 
'I wonder did she tell her it was herself took them?' said 
Sean. 
'She did, without doubt,' said I. 'This is how it happened. 
About dinner-time, she went in to Nora and they had the 
food just on the table. She saluted them. 
, "God and Mary to you, old woman," said Nora. "Food- 
time is a good time." 
, "It is, indeed," said Kate. "It's better for everyone to 
have something than all to be without." 
, "Sit now, old woman, until I warm a drop of milk for 
you. You like the milk." 
, "I do, my treasure," said Old Kate. 
'Nora passed her the warm milk and a couple of potatoes 
and a scrap of fish. 
, "l'vlusha, may God not prevent your hand from sharing, 
o daughter!" said she. 
, "Did you hear what the robber said to the poor man 
long ago, when he gave him the meat to eat?" said Nora. 
, "I didn't, my pet. What did he say?" said Old Kate. 
, "'Tis how he had a couple of beasts stolen from him by 
the same rogue and it happened that he came the way to 
the robber's house one night unexpectedly-and that was 
the generous, welcoming house! Meat was passed to him 


G 



84 An Old Woman's Reflections 
in plenty, but the poor man was timid. Although he had a 
good desire for the meat, he didn't want to be a glutton. 
The robber spoke to him. 
, " 'Eat the food, poor man!' said he. 'Eat your fill of the 
Co\VS of Grey John of Cow-herb!' 
, "When the poor man heard that, it wounded him to the 
heart, because he was Grey John himself, and he couldn't 
eat another bite, but he pretended he was very grateful to 
them. He had the very opposite under the rib, because he 
had the robber arrested the following night. And it's the 
same way with you and me, Kate," said Nora. "You eat 
your fill of your own, too, because 'tis I took the fish from 
you unknown to you." 
, "Musha, a cause to laugh for us!" said Old Kate, "I 
thought by the watching I had that neither crow nor eagle 
could come near to it unknown to me!" 
, "I was afraid," said Nora, "that if I asked you for it 
you'd be reluctant to give it to me. I made out that I'd 
come from north-west on you." 
'''I suppose I would, too," said Old Kate, "but the 
matter is right now. Haven't I my own share of it?" , 
'There's no stop on a person when he thinks of doing a 
trick like that,' said Sean. 'But I have the day spent, and 
the work undone. When will I be back from the Wide Peak 
with a load of turf?' 
'The day is long yet,' said I. 'A good man's turn of it is 
yet to be spent.' 
'You're right,' said Sean, but he hit the black ass a lick 
of the stick he had in his hand, and drove on. The poor ass 
was slow and lazy, and I think the delay I was putting on 
Sean was doing him good. The poor animal was startled 
when he felt the hard stick brought to bear on his ribs. He 
shook his untidy ears and moved forward quickly. He was 
obedient to his master, for it's often the master was not too 



How the Fish was Stolen 


85 


gentle with the creature. Wasn't it he knew the angry 
master ?-and to tell the truth it wasn't the gentle acquain- 
tance, because it was on him he'd work off all his crossness. 
I was alone again, looking around me, and Sean as far 
as my shout up the road and he taking dust out of the black 
ass. I'd hear now and again the sound of his voice. 'Tis how 
the ass was lazy, for the day was very hot, and I don't think 
my man was very satisfied in his mind the same day. The 
Wethers' Well pilgrimage was a subject for thought with 
him yet. 



CHAPTER TWELVE 


An Ass, a Bag of Potatoes, and Geese; 
Mackerel Shoaling 


What I am thinking about now, sitting here, is that life has 
changed greatly compared with twenty years ago. At that 
time the people of the island had rummaging and hauling, 
and especially when the mackerel season was in. 
There's a little harbour down the cliff, and it's not a very 
good harbour. The boot-marks of the unfortunates are to 
be seen on the grey stones of the beach. They have a track 
cut in the stone from being down and up there, and to top 
every hardship, there's danger of drowning there. 
I see the picture of the unfortunates before me. I see the 
shape of them, and his own bundle on each man's back, 
going down to the harbour. I hear, I think, the noise of the 
canoes being laid on the slip and the nets being drawn into 
them. A little while after that I see the canoes steering out 
into the mouth of the creek and the people talking to each 
other. The mackerel are shoaling in big patches out west 
on the waters of the shore, but there's too much day left 
for the fisherman to stretch out his nets. He is waiting until 
the stars shine in the sky. Look, there's a boat east and a 
boat west already. They are scattered like the small birds. 
The oars make noise, beating the water and splashing it in 
white foam in the sky, trying to race each other. At the 
same time I see the old women fussily running west at the top 
of the shore. They wouldn't break a hen-egg under their feet, 
the heart is so high up in their breasts, and they wouldn't 
wait to take the cups off the table, they're in such bodily haste. 



An Ass, a Bag of Potatoes, and Geese 87 
I remember well a fine harvest evening like that. The 
lateness of evening was there, and the canoes gone out 
fishing. I had a ridge of potatoes ungathered and I had to 
go and gather them. I took a couple of little bags on the 
back of an old white ass I had and west to the Mouth of 
the Shore-a little garden we had at the edge of the shore 
and we called it that because it was so near to the White 
Shore. My head was down, picking at my best, when I 
heard all the uproar and chatter west beyond me. I lifted 
my head and looked around me, but I saw nothing only 
the little children of the hamlet taking the heels off each 
other running towards the top of the shore. I made out 
there was something wonderful there, but whatever it was I 
had no sight of it, for I was in a hollow. When I had picked 
all, and the bags were full, I couldn't put them on the ass's 
back, because they were too heavy. I was waiting there until 
somebody would come the way who would help me to lift 
them up. It wasn't the long wait I had, because Sean 
Michael came to me from east, and I asked him to put the 
bags on the ass's back with me. It was short delay on him 
to put the bags on the ass's back without much help from me. 
'Drive him with you now,' said he, 'and I'll close the 
gate.' 
I drove on, the road east, but the uproar was still there, 
and I could see nothing of what was going on. But I wasn't 
far east when two women met me with soldierly stance, at a 
sharp speed. They hardly spoke to me, they were so 
anXIOUS. 
'God of powers, where are ye going, that so much striving 
is on ye?' said I. 'Or what's going on west?' 
'There isn't a drop of water on Yellow Island shore only 
mackerel shoaling!' said Nell, 'and all the canoes are in a 
way to sink each other around them,' and she went from 
me, in a hurry. They were of no importance only there was 



88 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


another couple after them and another couple and the same 
hurry on them. My heart was to be among them, but as 
we know, how could I because of having the potatoes on 
the ass's back? If I left him there it would be the fox in 
charge of the hens with me because the devil a one of them 
but he'd have eaten "\vhen I'd return. Therefore I had 
nothing to do only take it easy and press home. On the 
way before me was Pat Mickey, the blessing of God with 
his soul, standing at the fence and a spade under his 
chest. 
'By my oath, Pat Mickey, but the women of the hamlet 
are off their head tonight! Or I don't know what ails them 
at all?' 
'My soul from the devil, I don't know what ails them,' 
said he. 'Some of the old foolishness, I suppose.' 
'There isn't an old woman or a young woman in the top 
of the hamlet who is not gone west to the top of the shore,' 
said I. 
'I wonder what do they want west?' said he, and a kind 
of wonder on him. 
'Old Nell told me the fish was shoaling in the Yellow 
Island beach, and that the fishermen were in a way to 
drown each other over them, and I suppose she's right 
because I have the noise of the world to hear west from me 
for awhile,' said I. 
"Tis no wonder you would,' said he, 'because the evening 
is delightful and the appearance of fish is on the sea.' 
Just then who'd come from east to us only the Yank and 
he hurrying. It was very hard to understand two of them 
there talking together and I beckoned the ass with me. 
When I came to the house I hadn't a Christian of the Son 
of Judgment to be seen over or hither. They had all gone 
west to see the wrangling. I threw the potato bags off the 
ass's back and I left him there picking for himself. But it's 



An Ass, a Bag of Potatoes, and Geese 


89 


not picking he went but plundering. There was a next- 
door neighbour's bag of potatoes beside the bank because 
she didn't wait to put it in the shed. When she saw everyone 
running, she ran herself and left the bag there; and what 
do you say to the old white ass but that he found it out, and 
though he was old he was not \vanting in teeth. It wasn't a 
long delay on him tearing the bag. As soon as he tore the 
bag the potatoes went \tvith the slope. Then there was the 
scuffle, because there was a group of geese in the milking- 
field and here's for the potatoes with them in freedom. 
Each goose had his own knop in his beak, and as we know, 
that didn't put any check on the old white ass, for he was 
chewing at his best. Here's me to him and a stump of a 
stick in my hand. 
'Musha, the curse of God and His church on you, you 
rogue!' said I. 'If it's not you that is up to your job! If Old 
Nell finds out that 'twas you tore the pack, the end of it 
will never be heard.' 
I hit a flip of the stick on him and put him into the shed 
before he'd go eating the potatoes again and be caught 
at it. 
When I came back, who would be standing in the door- 
way but Long Sean, a boy who was spending his holidays 
in the island. 
'Sean,' said I, 'since nobody else is in charge of the house 
only you at the moment, do some aid to the bag of potatoes 
the animals have torn asunder. Look the geese themselves 
are having a time on them.' 
'By my baptism, I won't!' said he. 'Why didn't they stay 
in charge of them? It's not of my care. Let them mind 
them. If they were fretting about them it's not there they'd 
leave them.' 
'Musha, the bonham's baptism on you!' said I. 'Would it 
matter who'd do the good deed?' 



go 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


'It wouldn't indeed,' said Sean, 'but we'll have subject 
for amusement in a while, when Nell comes home.' 
My own patience broke and I put the scattering of the 
small birds on the geese. 
'It's not looking at the sport you are, Sean,' said I, 'or 
where were you ?' 
'Town with Thomas, the poet,! and I don't know on 
earth where all the people are gone.' 
'Look over west towards the top of the shore and you'll 
see where they are. And if you're short of Gaelic, on my 
soul it's there you'll get it.' 
'I suppose so; but I wouldn't understand as much as a 
word from them. As we know, they're quicker with their 
tongue than the Greek himself: especially when they're 
excited. There's nobody I understand better than you and 
Thomas.' 
'Hadn't you better go west to see the sport?' said I. 
'Can't ,ve see enough of them from this place?' said Sean. 
'But you'd have amusement on the old women. Look, 
they're in a way to get at each other's windpipes.' 
'It will be a furious fight amongst them!' said Sean. 
'It's certain it will,' said I. 'They are talking into each 
other's mouths already.' 
'Does this caper be going on usually, Peig?' 
'I never noticed such wrangling before, Sean, and much 
less did I see such a sight since 1 came to the island. The 
sea is co loured black with canoes and the fish so plentiful 
at the surface of the water that it would put joy on anyone. 
Look at the driving the canoes have and the clattering 
they have.' 
'There are more than the island's canoes there,' said Sean. 
'The canoes of Dunquin and the canoes ofVentry, and if 
I'd say it, from Moortown, and no wonder there's wrangling, 
1 Tomás Ó Crohan, author of The /slandman. 



An Ass, a Bag of Potatoes, and Geese 


9 1 


and enthusiasm in the women, because the men are out in 
a way to drown each other. Aren't they a nice sight?' said I. 
'Nice, indeed,' said Sean. 'Many a person would like to 
see them.' 
'It's glorious weather, Sean. The air at the bottom of the 
sky is as yellow as gold, and the reflection of the rocks is 
out in the water. There's not a breath blowing, but calm 
and beauty, and the fish so plentiful at the surface of the 
water. It was true for the poet when he made the hymn 
long ago: 


'Praise and gratitude to you, Holy Father, 
Who created the skies and heaven first 
And after that created the big wet sea 
And the heaps of fish in it swimming closely.' 


'Oh! great and widespread are God's gifts, praise for ever 
. 
to Him!' said Sean. 
'Great,' said I. 'Wouldn't the sight you see before you 
make you understand the grace of God? But I'm afraid the 
fishermen will have little of it, because it's seldom they 
succeed in killing any fish when it's on the surface like that 
too early in the evening.' 
'Do you say so?' said Sean. 
'I don't know, by my crook,' said I, 'but it's often I saw 
the canoes around them like that and no fish would go in a 
net out of it, and the fishermen say that 'tis how the weather 
is too bright. But isn't it teatime for you, Sean?' 
'It is,' said he, 'but I suppose there's nobody at the house 
yet,' and he went from me west. 
About ten o'clock or so he came to us again, because it 
was his way to spend a while of the night with us. 
'God your welcome!' said I. 'Have you any new story 
since ?' 
'1 have and a bagful,' said he. 



9 2 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


'Take the string off your mouth and let's have them,' 
said I. 
'Tut, woman. If I took the cord off, they'd go all over 
the dishes on me, like the potatoes went a while ago. I'd 
rather be telling them to you one by one. But the first story 
I have to tell you is that you have a sort of second sight. 
You told me this evening there was danger that it \vas a 
big pregnancy coming as a dead calf, for the man of the 
house said when he came home that there wasn't a fish 
killed in the bay tonight, and wasn't it awful work and the 
fish so plentiful?' 
'Musha, blinding and confusion on them!' said I. 'It is 
ever said that no work is the better for a crowd of women 
to be watching it. If the women stayed at home, maybe the 
matter wouldn't be as it is.' 
'God with my soul!' said Sean, 'you know there's no harm 
. 
like that in them.' 
'Arrah, man, the superstitions of the world follow women 
pedlars. The fishermen are always fleeing from them,' 
said I. 
'Anyway,' said Sean, 'they hadn't the fish. But the woman 
of our house was more concerned about the bag of potatoes 
that was gone to loss than all the fish from Bray Head to 
here. I think when she came home Aristotle himselfwouldn't 
understand her although he was a clever man. Devil a 
word I understood from her, anyway. I think she's in the 
same driving still but she can't work off her temper on 
anyone, but herself.' 
We had no chance of further talk that night, because a 
little girl came calling Sean. 
'Your supper is ready!' and she turned on her heel with- 
out making delay. 
'All right, all right, I'll be coming,' said Sean, and he 
stuck his hands in his overcoat and put the shape for the 



An AssJ a Bag of Potatoes J and Geese 


93 


road on himself. 'Goodnight to you, Peig!' said he, and went 
out the door slant-shouldered. 
Before that or since there didn't come such a sight of 
fish. A fisherman from Ventry parish who was there said 
that he didn't see at a race or a fair a sight that would beat 
what he saw that evening with the yellowing of the sun in 
the shore of the Yellow Island. But anything has but a 
\vhile up and down in all this life. The fishing is failed for 
years, but as the scholar said to the pagan long ago: 'The 
foetus turns', and maybe the fishing will come ahead yet, 
with the help of God. It's one of God's gifts and He never 
put a bush in the opening of a haven. 



CI-IAPTER THIRTEEN 


A Milk-House in Little Island)- 
Nance Daly and Nora Keaveney 


Many an old woman in Ireland had a nicer place and more 
pleasant to study than this, but I prefer this lonely place to 
any other place in Ireland. The golden mountains of Ireland 
are without mist before me. The sea is pouring itself against 
the rocks and running up in dark ravines and caves where 
the seals live. We are not disturbed by the uproar and noise 
of the city. There is a fine hedge around us and we are 
inside the Summerhouse of Peace. There is no picture-house 
only these lovely things God created, praise for ever to Him! 
Every time I get the chance I give a run to get a view of 
these things which are most pleasant to my heart.- Little 
Island is before me and white sheep in their fleeces grazing 
there where my mother remembered, when she was young, 
milk to be, and butter being made in plenty. 
'Tis well I remember, and I looking from me on this 
island, listening to my father and I a little girl talking about 
the people who were living in Little Island at that time, 
and in many other places. 'Tis little I thought then that 
I'd be living so near to that island. But since I'm sitting 
here, looking over at it, see how the thoughts run far back 
into the years that are gone by me-to the little solitary 
house at the foot of the hills again. It's a little thatched 
house. It's where I was born and reared. There's an old 
ruin a bit over from it, where Maurice Scanlan was, where 
I spent the days of my childhood. I see, I think, Maurice 
himself standing in the doorway, and he giving sweets to 



A Milk-House in Little Island 


95 


us, after his coming from Dingle. I see, I think, my mother 
sitting in the corner and Nell Malone and Old Mary 
O'Connor, and they talking about the things they remem- 
bered in their early youth. See Kate, my brother's wife, 
busy about the house and myself in the corner, rocking the 
cradle, heeding and giving ear to my mother telling this 
story to the others: 
'Long years after the bad times and the famine,' said she, 
'much of the land of Ireland was derelict. The poor people 
who used to inhabit it were gone the way of truth with the 
hunger and want. Those of them who managed to live, and 
had a piece of land, had big rent to pay and the hardship 
of life working violently on them, and when they couldn't 
pay the rent they got nothing but the side of the road 
distressfully and their house burnt. 
'As I said before, the land was derelict and there was no 
gain fi
om it for the landlord. The plan he made was to 
put milk-houses, or dairies as they were called, here and 
there, put servants in charge of them, and put milch-cows 
on the land. I remember well two of them to be in Dunquin, 
one of them west there at the Shed and another down at 
the Milk Crossroads. He put another on Little Island, with 
a married couple minding it, a man named Richard 
O'Carroll and Kate Daly, or Kate from Little Island, as 
she was called. Kate was clever and she had good knowledge 
of butter and milk. She had two sisters, Brigid and Nance. 
It's Brigid was at the Milk Crossroads and Nance was at 
the Shed. There was no limit with them for minding butter 
and milk. None of them was married but Kate, and she 
had no offspring. She and her husband were living snugly 
with no want from the Lord. A big boat was serving them 
frequently. They had a nice comfortable house in Little 
Island, and if they hadn't a nice airly little island, it's not a 
day yet. There was nothing Kate lacked more than water, 



9 6 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


because there was no spring-water well in Little Island, and 
'tis how Richard O'Carroll had to bring little barrels of 
"vater from the Heel of the Island. Often it wasn't calm, 
and the poor man would risk drowning; but long as he was 
succeeding, providence got a chance on him and he was 
drowned, may they be safe where it is told! That gave its 
name to the Heel since-O'Carroll's Heel it's called. 
'That put an end to butter and milk and living in Little 
Island. Poor Kate had to leave the place and face out 
somewhere else to earn her living. 
'As I said before, her sister, Nance, was a milk-woman 
at the Shed. She was a lovely young woman, and it was no 
wonder the young men were looking after her. Small 
interest Nance had in any of them but one man, that is, 
Young Sean O'Flaherty. He was her total share of the men 
of the world and she wouldn't allow any other girls to wink 
at him. But Young Sean wasn't so senseless after her. Over 
there he was living where Owen Brown's house is today. 
There was nobody in the house but himself and his sister, 
Kate. Their parents were on the way of truth for years 
before that and as we know they had to fend for themselves. 
So, when Kate got the chance she married a man from 
Coom named Sean Brosnahan. That left Young Sean alone 
and he had to marry to have a housewife. Nance thought, 
no wonder, that she'd be that woman-there was nothing 
to upset her with him. She had an overwhelming love for 
him and she thought that he had the same for her, but he 
hadn't. Love is a thing that torment and torture follows 
and often it's not lasting, and it's a small thing that upsets it. 
That's how it happened to Nance Daly. 
'Shrovetide came and there was a wedding on in Flag- 
stone Glen and there ,,,,ere many girls from the south parish 
at the wedding, and they neatly dressed in the fashion of 
that time. Whoever was at that wedding, Young Sean 



A Milk-House in Little Island 


97 


O'Flaherty was there and many a young girl was looking 
under her eyelashes and making honey in her heart of his 
good looks, because he was a proportionately-made young 
man, brown curly hair on him, a flush in his cheeks, and 
two grey eyes in his head that would make any dear girl 
like him. 
'There was a party of the girls sitting on a seat in a lonely 
corner of the house, and the devil to Sean but he noticed 
them and went where they were. After a little talk he told 
one of them to sing a song, but she said she couldn't, that 
she never sang any song. He continued urging from one to 
the other until he went to the fifth girl. She took courage 
and she said "I'll sing a song for you, good man!" She 
caught him by the hand and she started on this song: 


My great loss and my grief 
And my visit this way, 
My parents will be grieved 
Asking about me of everyone. 
I gave you great love 
Over the boys of Ireland, 
Until I'm stretched in the grave 
I will not forsake your merriment. 


Had I a box full of gold 
And a chest full of silver, 
I would give it to Sean 
He's the commanding hearty. 
Isn't it happy for the woman 
Who will get you tied from the priest! 
But my want through my heart 
Is that I am for ever parted from you! 


, "Forever! Forever!" said he, "What is your name, 
young woman? Your name, please? Tell it to me!" and he 
spoke very quietly, because Nance was sitting near the table 
and her eyes sharp peeping on him. 



9 8 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


, "Nora Keaveney," said she, "and it's in Ventry parish 
my parents live." 
, "You are my choice above any girl I have seen yet, and 
if you gave me your hand I'd have no other wife but you," 
said he, and he moved up to her, saying those words. 
, "Have my promise and my word, if my parents agree 
to it." 
, "All right," said Sean, and his heart was as light as a 
blackbird, because he had given the love of his breast to 
Nora at that moment. It was no wonder he had, because 
she was a pretty, gentle girl, "vith skin as white as the swan, 
her cheeks as red as the rose, and curly black hair on her. 
She was proportionately made and it would be hard to find 
fault with her. 
'Next day Sean and a lad \vith him \vent off, and nobody 
knew where he was until he came back to Vicars town with 
Nora Keaveney married. Then the row was on. When 
Nance Daly heard that her dear love was married to 
another woman, she nearly lost her mind. She used to be 
watching Nora, day and night like a cat would be watching 
a mouse. It was dangerous for Nora to put her head out 
the door, because Nance "vas always watching her. Poor 
Nora had no idea why Nance should be that way. If she 
had known the great love Nance had for Young Sean she 
wouldn't have been so haughty as she was, coming, but 
nobody gave her that information. 
'One day at the beginning of spring, Sean was working 
in the field, and when Nora had the potatoes for the dinner 
drained, she went out on the garden fence and called her 
husband aloud, but she didn't manage to make the second 
call when Nance had a shower of stones all around her. 
Barely she got her soul inside \vith her, because when she 
was standing inside on the floor Nance aimed at her with a 
rough stone that knocked the side out of the potato-pot 



A Milk-House in Little Island 


99 


beside her. The poor girl was frightened. When Sean came 
home he knew that Nora was not easy in her mind. 
, "What's wrong with you?" said he. 
, "I'm frightened alive by a woman without sense that's 
around there," said Nora. "I don't know who she is or what 
she has against me, but she's after me every day since I 
reached this house. And look, she has broken the potato-pot 
today, but I don't care in the devil, so long as it's not my 
head she has broken. Do you know why she's like that?" 
, "It's all the same to you about her-don't pretend that 
you hear her, but when dinner is ready put a white rag on 
the gable, and I'll come home." 
'Yes, the year was slipping by and if Nance was tor- 
mented, she had a kind of surrender to her enemy, Nora, 
because she was going to have a young child for Christmas. 
'A daughter was born to Nora, and because of milk being 
scarce 'tis how she was buying milk in the house of White 
Dermot who was living down at the bridge. One morning, 
after the morning meal, Nora told her husband to stay and 
mind the baby while she'd be fetching the milk. She took a 
jug with her and went down the road. But Nance was not 
snoozing, for she saw Nora going down the road. She 
decided it was a good time to catch up even with her. The 
envy and the old love were fighting each other in her heart 
still, and she made out she could get some vengeance on 
Nora because she was the top and bottom of her heart's 
torment. She had a bitter hatred for her and it would be 
great ease of mind for her if she could get revenge on her 
this way or that way. On that, she followed Nora to White 
Dermot's house. Poor Nora was only in across the threshold 
when Nance was in on her heels. She had the look of anger. 
She was a hard strong woman and it was no wonder Nora 
would be afraid of her. She spoke to the woman of the house. 
, "Have you milk for me today, Molly?" said she. 


H 



100 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


, "Indeed I haven't, 0 daughter," said Molly. "I have 
the last drop sent in the vessel to this good woman here." 
'Nance didn't need but "I want a reason" and her eyes 
lit with the flame of anger, and she said with strong, fearless 
VOIce: 
, "She won't have my milk!" said she. "It's enough for 
her to have my dear love and the man who took my sense 
from me-but he won't have much good in her after me," 
and she shaped to fight. 
'When Nora saw her with the crossing shape on her, she 
decided she had better stand her ground and defend herself 
as best in Ireland she could do. Before Nance had a chance 
to say "God with my soul", Nora had jumped out of herself 
like a wildcat, gripping her by the hair of her head. With 
the first twist she gave her she knocked Nance down on the 
floor . "Yes, girl," said she, "that's the recommendation of 
two people from the Big Cliff for you-whichever of us is 
strongest be uppermost-and as I am uppermost 1'11_ put 
the mark of my limbs to be seen by everybody on you. 
And if you loved Young Sean O'Flaherty, he had no love 
for you, and I have himself and his love and his baby, and 
you whistle away for yourself!" 
'Such wrangling and biting Moll never saw before. The 
flame was in her eyes looking at them. But much as Nance 
Daly was inclined for fight, she was as gentle as a sheep's 
lamb when Nora parted with her. She scraped and scratched 
and cut her so that there was a red brand on Nance. 
, "Go now," said Nora, "and don't tell where you were, 
and don't look over your shoulder at me as long as you live. 
The lovely looks you had coming, it's different appearance 
you have now! But when you're healed you can give your 
love to somebody other than Sean ü'Flaherty." 
'She took the milk-jug that was on the table and little 
grass grew under her feet until she reached home. She 



A Milk-House in Little Island 


101 


suspected that Nance would follow her and split her with 
stones, but she didn't. She was sour enough with herself 
and ashamed of the mistake she had made. From that day 
until she left the Shed she didn't look over her shoulder at 
Nora Keaveney.' 
The long years are gone in a gallop, and these who are 
in the life of my story gone too, as the mist goes with the 
wind. I can see today only the place where they used to 
live, but they draw me back on the lonely road of thoughts, 
and 'tis nice how Youth pays me a small visit, when I'm at 
tight grips with the years. I am young again, I think. There 
is courage and merriment in my heart. I feel the mind as 
strong and courageous as ever it was. But when the fine 
pleasant thoughts go, rust and sourness and weakness of 
the brain comes on me and I feel some heavy weight coming 
down on my heart. 
Maybe the reader has youth in power. If so, he feels the 
heart light and secure, the laugh clean, the jump musical, 
the jollity and merriment, the brightness and freshness and 
fragrance everywhere on his way. I remember having all 
those little jewels mysel
 but see how the ugly thief age came 
and stole them from me! Great as the guarding is, he sneaks 
upon us. Nobody feels him coming. 



CHAPTER FOURTEEN 


The Qyarrel about Hens in Dunquin 


'Where were you, Michael?' said I. 
'I was over there east at the gable of Dermot's house 
listening to Old Mary and Nell. Such clamour they had 
about hens I never heard.' 
'Isn't it great that there'd have to be always an argument 
between them?' said I. 
'Mary suspects that her hen is laying in Nell's place, and 
Nell is denying in the matter, and that's the reason of the 
argument,' said Michael. 
'Musha, it's a queer thing that the women never agreed 
with each other,' said I. 'Wherever they'll be they'll have 
some gib-gab going on. But look, that reminds me of .the 
quarrel two women had in our hamlet when I was a little 
one growing up. It was a hen was the cause of that quarrel- 
ling too, and such a reviling and disputing of words they 
had! It wasn't one day that was going on but throughout 
the year. 
'These two women I say were living in the two houses 
nearest to each other and they were always in dispute with 
each other, because one was no more fluent with the tongue 
than the other. I think the vein of poetry was in each of 
them by birth and it's often we'd be listening to them when 
there would be any argument between them. 
'I remember an evening when I was in Little Brigid's 
house, myself and Kate Jim and Nell Brigid, and we 
learning our lessons for tomorrow. Brigid herself was sitting 
on a seat and a fine red fire before us. There were two girls 
spinning, girls related to Brigid. They had two spinning 



The Qp,arrel about Hens in Dunquin 


10 3 


wheels and they were spinning perfectly. Tim Sean, the man of 
the house, was sitting on a chair making a basket of green 
briars and now and again you'd hear him put a grunt from 
him when the thorns would prick him. Everyone was quiet 
only Mary, one of the girls who were spinning. She was 
singing, and she was a fine singer. But it wasn't long until 
the song stopped because Kate James, the next-door neigh- 
bour, came in. She saluted, but the answer she got from 
Little Brigid was not too kind. 
, "What's wrong with you now, Brigid?" said Kate, "or 
what anger is this ? You have something going on again- 
or what reached your ears that put the surge of anger 
on you?" 
, "Musha, I'm hearing a lot this weather," said Brigid. 
, "Maybe it's the lie you hear," said Kate. 
'They had from the small word to the big word in that 
way, until Brigid said in a loud voice: 
, "Do you know who you're talking to ? To a woman who 
came from a hamlet which cannot be accused of anything 
from any side of the sides. Here they are for you, girl I" 
said she, and she stretched herself. "The clean people of 
Brown Hill, the spotless Mannion people, Moriartys of 
goodwill and the White Connells-and isn't it hard to 
revile them?" 
'''I don't mind about the relations," said Kate, "but 
tell me what put the anger on you." 
, "The woman of the house up here who has me wronged 
about my hen, and I'm full sure it's my own hen." 
, "Maybe it is and maybe it isn't," said Kate. "There 
could be a mistake in the matter. It's often I saw people 
full sure about certain things and be very much mistaken 
about them, and maybe it's the same way with you." 
, "Oh 1 yes, just," said Brigid. "You, too, are against me. 
Y e are a ship of the same timber. Have the door for yourself 1 



10 4 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


Leave my house!" and she lit with anger. Kate got up 
quickly and when she was going out the door she spoke aloud: 
, "To the devil I commit you and your hippish hut!" 
said she. 
'Only for how quickly she was clear of the doorway she'd 
have a lump on her head from the sod of hard peat turf, 
from Brigid, because she took noise out of the door with 
the sod. 
'The cause of the talk and all the anger was a hen that 
was in dispute between Little Brigid and White Mary. 
Maureen, White Mary's daughter, got a hen as a present 
from her aunt when Maureen was on a visit to her a while 
before that. When the hen was in a strange place the little 
creature used to be going alone because of the other hens 
pecking her. But at last she settled down with Brigid's hens 
and then Brigid wanted to say it was her own and she 
wouldn't let little Maureen or her mother go near it. I 
needn't say but they had great talk and disputing and there 
was nothing in the people's mouths but themselves-Brigid 
always saying that the hen belonged to her own sister who 
had gone to America a while before that, and White Mary 
arguing it was not so, that it was her own daughter got it 
from her aunt. The shape or skin of the hen wasn't worth 
the amount of talk was made of it. 
'At last the aunt, Nora O'Shea, heard of the quarrel of 
the hen and another thing she heard that Brigid said if 
Nora recognized the hen, she would settle. Therefore Nora 
decided to pay them the visit on the coming Sunday, and 
after Mass that day she went in to Brigid. 
, "Musha, a hundred welcomes before you, Nora!" said 
Brigid. 
, "May ye live strong and well!" said Nora. 
, "I suppose it's the hen-quarrel that brought you to us ?" 
said Brigid. 



The ()y,arrel about Hens in Dunquin 


10 5 


, "It is indeed," said Nora. "It's a great shame for next- 
door neighbours to be in disagreement with each other over 
a paltry little thing that's not worth mentioning." 
, "Musha, you're right," said Brigid, "but when you'd 
be sure you owned it, it would be hard for you to part with 
it. But if you make out it's yours the matter will be a calm 
peace with us." 
, "If I saw her I should recognize her," said Nora. 
'Then Brigid stood up and put some food on a dish in 
the middle of the house and she called the hens. Soon there 
were over forty hens around the dish and a stranger of a 
big red cockerel with three inches of a big double comb on 
him, and he wouldn't prove a good share to anyone who 
would interfere with the hens. 
, "God with my soul! You have a flock of them!" said 
Nora. 
, "I have," said Brigid, "most of them stayed with me 
after my sister who went to America lately." 
'Nora was looking closely at them, and at last she stood 
up, and down with her to where they were eating. She 
caught the hen of the dissent and picked it up. 
, "That's the hen I gave to Maureen," said she. "Keep 
her or give her from you!" 
'Before the word was out of her mouth the cockerel had 
jumped out of himself and he was entangled in her legs 
and had a painful peck given to her in the back of her hand. 
She was anxious letting the hen go, because her legs were 
well scratched. 
, "Musha, it's an old proverb," said she, "and it's true, 
that the peacemaker doesn't go free I"
 and she took herself 
out the door. 
, 'Twas after her going home they had all the arguing 
because they started to make verses of poetry for each 
other. A short while after that there wasn't in the mouths 



106 An Old Woman's Reflections 
of the children of the hamlet but the apt talk that two 
women gave to each other.' 
'Have you the verses, Peig?' said Michael, 'I would like 
to hear some of "The Quarrel of the Hens in Dunquin".' 
'Here it is for you, then,' said I and I started to sing 
these verses: 


BRIGID : 
Mary Joan is on the upper side of the hill from me 
Cursing me every day about my hen; 
But I ask my Master and bright Mary, his Mother, 
That they find shame as they gave to me. 


WHITE MARY: 
No benefit to the prattler the quiet proud girl 
To be sitting here beside her on the upper side of the hill; 
Of the breed of the men who were tall and bright, 
And isn't it hard for ever to put her from her surname. 


BRIGID : 
It's not your hen at all but my sister's hen, 
Which she left to me when she went over the sea. 
Mary Joan is saying it's hers 
And may little Mary not benefit, doing without it. 


WHITE MARY: 
She is the gabber of an arrogant yellow hag 
Who has a lot of it her mind and will for ever, 
Who stole my child's hen which came from over the hillock 
And may she never much increase her purse. 


BRIGID : 
I hope the Virgin will keep me like unto her 
However long my life be now in the crowd; 
But I saw her awhile and she had nothing 
And wouldn't all her life only for women's heritage. 
'They continued that way but it was very soon they had 
another care on them, because when they were strongest 
was when they were nearest to losing their feathers. Like a 



The Quarrel about Hens in Dunquin 


10 7 


hundred others, their heads were laid low by a sick bout 
that finished all the arguing; and I think that's the same 
way with these two women of ours, too.' 
'I don't know in the world, Peig, but they're going in 
each other's combs about the hens on the east side of the 
hamlet. I'm thinking for a long time that the black pigl 
is living between the two glens.' 
'May God not allow that, Michael!' said I. 
'Oh! God allows it, little woman,' said Michael, and he 
put fire to his pipe and went strolling for himself the road 
west to the beach. 
1 A harbinger of woe, in folk-belief. 



CHAPTER FIFTEEN 


'Martin Monday' a Gaelic Speaker 
from Mexico 


My love God, it puts great joy on myoId heart to hear the 
Gaelic language being spoken by the grandees and nobles 
of the country! When I was a little girl earning the bread 
in Dingle, it's little I thought that the way of today would 
be heard. But the longer a person lives the more he'll have 
to tell. The proverb says that all good comes given time, 
and grace with patience. At that time we'd be ashamed and 
head-bent for not having little or more English. Small 
respect anyone had for us-'The Asses of the Island', the 
Dingle people used to call us. I remember well 'twas often 
a big man used to come in to us, with sarcasm in his stranger 
mouth and breathing on his speech. You'd hear the ugly 
echoes he'd take out of the rafters of the house, with 'Good 
morning, sir', or 'Good morning, madam', and you'd hear 
the answer 'How are you getting along, sir?' It would make 
me sick to be listening to them. But it is ever said 'If it's a 
wrong, it will return', and the mocking they'd make about 
us at that time, we are able to give to them today as 
lavishly as they gave it to us, becau5e it's few people are 
brought to this island who are not able to speak to us in 
our own language. 
One of these I made great wonder of was Martin Dillon, 
or 'Martin Monday', as the island people christened him. 
A stranger from Mexico, who came lately to us, a gentle 
youth and a clever scholar. It's often he'd be on a visit to 
us and he was the accurate historian-his master I never 



'Martin Monday' 


log 


met yet. I was astonished how he had managed to have the 
Gaelic so fluently, and I questioned him about it. 
'Don't be surprised,' said he, 'at the Gaelic being so 
fluent with me, because my mother had it and she never 
hid it from me.' 
'But how did it happen that that noble gem stayed with 
your mother?' said I. 
'It stayed,' said he; 'she kept it alive in fond memory of 
the place she was born, in Iveragh, and she had limitless 
love for that place. "My lovely sun-home", she used always 
call it, for she used to be telling us stories about that place 
when we were children growing up. I remember well the 
evening she was telling us about the hardship she had from 
her youth, and that that was why she had no love for the 
stranger language. Although we were living in Mexico, far 
from the company of Gaels or Gaelic-speakers, Gaelic was 
the fireside language my father and mother used to speak 
to us. Although English was being used in Mexico, Spanish 
was the common language there. My mother had little 
knowledge of Spanish so Gaelic was the language she pre- 
ferred to speak to us. 
'She was only nine years of age,' said he, 'when the bailiffs 
came to the door to them and threw them out on the road 
and set fire to the little house they had. 'Tis how they were 
mocking at the mother when she was beating her hands and 
crying bitterly. What would she do with her young family, 
or where would she go with them for the night? But little 
heed had they for the beating of hands. 
'The neighbours made up some little shelter for them for 
the night, but it was the cold place. The woman and the 
four children had to live there, but the mother lived only 
twelve days. She died of grief and heartbreak, and that left 
my mother with a burden because she had to fend for her 
brothers who were young and weak. But God helps weakness 



110 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


and as she was growing older she was managing better 
to aid them and keep them at school. Her father had to be 
working for the neighbours, because he had neither house 
nor land then. But they were doing well, for when my 
mother was eighteen years of age her aunt in California sent 
her her fare. She managed to get to her and she wasn't long 
with her aunt when she got work in a good house. As soon 
as she had any small sum of money earned, she was thinking 
more about her father and her brothers than about herself: 
When her oldest brother was twenty years of age, she sent 
him his fare, and across the sea with him. He got good 
work, too, and often the two of them were on a visit to 
their aunt's house, and 'twas she was proud of my mother. 
It was no wonder, because she was a sensible, modest girl 
who could easily accept good advice from her aunt. 
'One evening, walking alone, she saw a lovely young lad 
before her in the street. A kind of worry came on her 
because she perceived that she should recognize him. As 
soon as he stood in front of her she saluted him with God 
and Mary and he saluted her, mannerly and softly, with 
God and Mary and Patrick. 
, "Thanks to God," said she, "for a man to meet me in a 
foreign street who can answer me in my own language! 
Where are you from, good man?" 
, "I am a Kerryman and in Kenmare I lived." 
, "What family are you from?" said she. 
, "Of the Dillon people-James Dillon are my name and 
surname," said he. 
, "And it's from Glenbeigh I am," said she. "Isn't it 
lucky how we met each other! I'll have a companion now." 
'They walked together until they went to her aunt's house, 
and it's on her the grea t surprise was when she sa \tV the stranger · 
, "Where did you meet this young man?" said she, "or 
who is he?" 



'Martin Monday' 


I I I 


, "He is a friend of ours, Aunt," said she, "and a next- 
door neighbour; and it's near a miracle that we should 
meet so far from home. James Dillon are his name and 
surname and it's from Kenmare he came." 
, "Wherever he's from he has the appearance of a good 
man," said the aunt, "and I have a hundred welcomes 
before you." 
'That was the first evening they became acquainted, but 
it wasn't the last evening with them, for every time he got 
the chance he'd come on a visit to them. It was very soon 
both their minds were in one mind and they at their best 
to save a little before settling down. He was earning a good 
big pay, because 'tis how he was working on a big ship that 
was going from California to Mexico and every run he'd 
do he'd be watching closely to see if he'd find any nice place 
to settle in. At last he decided on a place that was, he 
thought, satisfactory. On a visit he paid to my mother he 
disclosed his secret and told her that he had a place decided 
in Mexico if she would like it and if she would wish to pay 
a visit there to see it in a couple of days. 
, "I'll go anywhere with you," said she, "but I'll have to 
place it in my aunt's permission first, for I have no other 
mother but herself.." 
'In a couple of days after that she was aboard a ship that 
was sailing to Mexico, but she had only a short visit there. 
'Two months after that my mother and father were 
married in California. They gathered their things and bade 
farewell to the aunt and went to Mexico to dwell, where 1 
was born and reared. I have three brothers and a sister and 
all of them can speak Gaelic as well as I. That's my story 
for you, woman of the house.' 
'Great God, Martin,' said I, 'it's no wonder that you 
are proud of your mother, and to say that she kept the 
Gaelic alive and bestowed it on you as a gem.' 



112 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


'I would never be satisfied without seeing the place where 
my mother was born. That's why I came all the way. It 
won't be long more until my visit is finished, and indeed 
I'll be lonely.' 
'Musha, may God bring you safe, Martin!' said I, 'and 
bring my good wishes to your mother when you are going.' 



CHAPTER SIXTEEN 


The News of the I9 I6 Revolution: 
the Black-and- Tans' Visit 


Long years after my coming to the island there was clamour 
and confusion, that there was a destroying battle between 
Irish and Strangers in Dublin. At first you wouldn't believe 
a word of it. A big story, a wonderful story it was. The 
postman brought us the story, may God grant his soul 
eternal rest! He said that Dublin City was one huge fire 
and the big guns of the Stranger battering it and the 
fragrant blood of the Irish being spilled. 
'The Irish are awake again,' said he, 'and the people are 
stirred as I never saw them; and it's danger in my mind 
that life won't be too peaceful with Yellow John!'! 
'You saying it and God to answer you!" said Big Owen 
O'Sullivan who was putting tobacco in his pipe. 'Material 
for intelligence for ye, men, that it wasn't without authority 
the Volunteers were drilling. The day came at last when 
they were able to strike a blow on their enemy.' 
'On my soul, Owen,' said Old Michael, greatly stirred, 
'but it will be paid for dearly, because great as our hate 
for England is, great and wonderful is the strength she has. 
We heard that the sun never set on her lands.' 
'Yellow John will want them all, Old Michael, before he 
is finished with the People of Ireland, if today's story is 
true. ' 
'I suppose, musha, that in Irish talk there was never 
but cliff grass compared with this heavy blow that has 
1 A name for John Bull. 



114 


An Old J1 l oman's Rtflections 


been struck in the Royal City of Ireland, if it's true.' 
'If it's true,' said the King,2 with sarcasm in his voice. 
'As sure as there's grey whiskers on your jawbone the 
heaviest beating that was ever beaten in Ireland is going 
on there. And worse than that there's a warship firing in 
on the city. They say total destruction is done already there. 
I heard that the girls of the city were fighting shoulder to 
shoulder with the lads, my music they!' 
, 'Twas of their ancestors' kind to have the noble royal 
drop in them,' said Big John Carney, 'but my regret and 
worry, the enemy is too strong, I fear, and they will be 
vanquished early! Did you hear was there any stirring 
being done by the other people of Ireland ?' 
'I did. They are already preparing themselves for the 
battle, but 'tis said that it's not to Dublin they are inclined 
to go but that 'tis how they'll be engaging the enemy in 
battle here and there. But many of the Volunteers are 
facing for Dublin. It seems they would rather fall in the 
battle than let the enemy go victorious.' 
'May God join strength with the lads!' said Big Owen. 
'The King's barracks will be knocked down again and 
Yeomen being hunted by us.' 
'By my palms but the day is after coming at last,' said 
Old Michael, 'but this won't do. Words don't fatten the 
brothers!' and he threw his bag over his back. 
It wasn't long after that until the battle was on all over 
Ireland. There wasn't to be heard from morning till night 
but War, War, War-in the air over us and all around us. 
The man who would be herding his stock at the top of the 
hill, when he'd come home, the first question he'd ask was, 
'Is there any story from the War today?' or 'Which side is 
giving in?' He'd have terror in him; you'd think it was a 
spirit or some pooka he saw on the mountain, but it wasn't; 
2 The King was the postman. 



The News of the 1916 Revolution 


115 


'tis how he'd be upset in his mind. There was a man in this 
hamlet at that time and wherever he'd go there'd be the 
smell of powder. In the wind that was blowing from west 
over the top of Maam, he was being suffocated by the ugly 
smell of powder. But the little boys were not very grateful 
to him, for often he sent them running for their lives up the 
side of the hill, persuading them the sky was on fire in the 
west and that the strong smell of powder was being blown 
before the wind, and sparks of fire. The poor boys were so 
disturbed then that they'd believe him. When they'd get 
to the top of the hill they couldn't see anything but 
the white slender legs of the north wind. If they had 
hold of him then they'd take the grey whisker off his 
ja\vbone, but he'd be fast asleep, without any heed for 
them. 
I remember a morning I was up very early because I 
had a good lot of work to do. When I put my head to the 
door, it would be a good person the delight of that hour 
wouldn't lift the mist from his heart. The sea was smooth 
and slippery, and the dew heavy on the grass and the sun 
beating over the back of Eagle Mountain as red as a piece 
of old gold. If I had pen and ink then wouldn't I describe 
well the delight of that morning. Many a nice colour I had 
to be seen with the rising of the sun-the gulls on the beach, 
the lark above me singing his pure gentle song and more, if 
I mentioned them. But it was soon those nice things were 
put astray on me, because I saw a man running east the 
road. He startled me, because it's seldom you'd see a man 
running like that, and soon there was another man galloping 
after him. 'Yes,' said I to myself: 'something has happened.' 
I moved out and I was peeping, but if so, I had nothing to 
see. But soon I got the release from my task because a little 
boy came across. 
'Musha, Johnny, my treasure,' said I, 'what's going on 


I 



116 An Old Woman's Reflections 
do\vn at the harbour that has all the people gathered there 
so early in the morning?' 
'There are,' said he, 'two lads from Dingle who came 
fleeing for their lives this morning. English they were 
speaking and I didn't pick with my ears only this much -' 
and he stopped. 
'And what is it?' said I and eagerness on me to hear the 
story. 
'Musha, I don't know did my ears take it with them 
correctly. ' 
'Speak, man, speak! Let it to me!' said I. 
, "ALL JOHN STREET IS BURNED!" , said he. 
'And who burned it?' said I. 
'Don't ask me,' said he, 'I don't understand any English,' 
and he went from me airily for himself. 
'It's a pity everyone isn't as innocent as you, boy,' said I. 
'But welcome the grace of God! The blood is being spilled 
at our door at last. I suppose 'tis how the Irish made an 
attack on them in Dingle. If so, I suppose people fell on 
both sides.' 
Before I had time to put more questions to myself: \vho 
would come in but Old Nell, my next-door neighbour. 
'Musha, Peig, my heart,' said she, 'how can you be so 
worldly and the end of the world upon us?' 
'11usha, welcome to it!' said I, 'but this war won't end 
the world, or the war that will come after it. It's not wars, 
but God Himself: praise for ever to Him! will end it. And, 
poor woman, if it's for you or me to fall in this war, don't 
you think that better people than us will fall in it?' 
'That's true, Peig, but as \ve know, that wouldn't take 
the fear off me, to know that a better person than I would 
fall in the fray. Didn't you hear that the battle was going 
on in Dingle?' 
'If I did, I have no correct authority for it.' 



The News of the 19 I 6 Revolution 


II? 


'But indeed, my pet, it's true. There are two lads from 
Dingle in the hamlet since the end of the night. There was 
a battle on and the commander of the Stranger army was 
killed, and more of his men.' 
'Were any of the Volunteers laid low?' said I. 
'I didn't hear that there were,' said she, 'but Dingle is 
to be set on fire because madness and anger grip the 
Strangers and I suppose wholesale plundering is afoot there 
by now.' 
'It's not, Nell,' said I. 'Have sense. A different story will 
be heard tomorrow.' 
'May God let good stories of the best to us!' said Nell. 
'I am afraid because the enemy is too clever, too treacherous 
always.' 
'Hush your mouth, woman! God is stronger than hope! 
Didn't you ever hear "At the height of the storm heìp is 
nearest?" Aren't we far west from them and we should 
have no fear. It's not worth their while coming to this sea 
island. ' 
'On my own palms, musha,' said Nell, 'but I heard 
people saying that they were going to pay it a visit, far 
west as it is. They suspect there's an army hidden here and 
you wouldn't know but it would be in the middle of the 
night they'd knock on your door. They are clean out of 
their minds because of how true the Irish are to each other. 
They thought, the fools, that they had only to come, because 
they thought they hadn't before them in this little country 
but people of no heed. But it's clear to them today that it's 
soul-gambling seriously for them to meet the lads. There;s 
wonder and amazement on them where are the arms coming 
from to them. I wouldn't be a bit surprised if they hopped 
in to us. This island of ours is lonely and, in their mind, 
useful for hiding arms, and they have an enormous sus- 
picion of us. ' 


1* 



118 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


'Musha, if they come itself:' said I, 'they won't have but 
"An idle journey and a dead sheep", as the woman said 
long ago.' 
But Nell was right, because a couple of days after that 
there was no canoe in Dunquin but was in to us full of 
people. The Stranger soldiers it was. They made the Dun- 
quin people take them to the island. They dug their heels 
in at first that they wouldn't come with them, but the 
soldiers threatened arms on them and the poor people had 
to give in, though against their will. 
When they came in then there was the wrangling because 
they were sure the island was blown up in the sky and 
everything in it burnt, both houses and people. The end of 
the world was there that day, we thought. As \ve know, we 
never saw the war forces, and signs on it-you wouldn't lay 
an eye on anyone who had his own natural colour. 
I was sitting by the fire, drinking a cup of tea, as usual, 
when Eileen my daughter ran in the door and terror in her. 
'Oh! God with us, Mammy, all the soldiers and guns 
that are about the hamlet-and what are you doing?' 
'I am eating, my girl,' said I. 'If it's death itself for me 
it's a great thing to be strong for the long road.' 
'I suppose,' said she, 'there will be no house or person 
on the island but will be burned to the ground.' 
'Don't mind that, my pet,' said I. 'We'll all be together 
in the name of God.' 
The word wasn't out of my mouth when Patrick, my 
husband, the blessing of God with his soul, came in, and 
mad rushing on him. 
'For God's sake,' said he, 'have you no anxiety only 
eating and drinking, and your eating and drinking to be 
ended immediately. Hurry and take down those pictures on 
the wall !'3 
3 Pictures of Thomas Ashe and the 1916 leaders. 



The JVews of the 1916 Revolution 


IIg 


'Musha, defeat and wounding on those who felled them!' 
said I. 'They felled them without mercy and they alive, 
and it seems I have to hide the pictures from them now, 
and they dead! But may I be dead and as dead as a stone 
if I'll take them down in fear of any Stranger wretch! and 
another thing, that big picture is so secure that Oscar 4 
couldn't pull it down, the strongest day he ever was.' 
'Take it down!' said he, angry. 
'I couldn't, 1 say. It will have to be left where it is, and 
if it's the cause of our death, it's welcome. They fought and 
fell for our sake, and as for Thomas Ashe's picture,' said I, 
'I can't hide it from anyone.' 
Before I could say 'God with my soul' the house filled in 
with them. Such a sight I never saw. It's a good man they 
wouldn't make tremble, hands and feet, and especially 
people like us who never had any experience of military. 
But I had nothing to do but take it easy. Indeed anyone 
who would be there that day would laugh because we had 
no understanding each other only deaf and dumb talk, and 
it's very little of that was going on. It was God's will that 
they went their way without doing harm or damage and 
many an old woman had it in her heart and on the tip 
of her tongue that they mightn't outlast the year. 
There was a big long week before we came to ourselves 
agaIn. 
Old Nell met me a couple of days after that. 
'Arrah Blessed Mary, Peig, wasn't it a wonderful day!' 
said she. 'I never made an appointment with my soul. 
Great is the pity of a hamlet that they go to! and my pity 
with God the people they'd work the arms on! Weren't 
they the mob! I thought 1 \vas in the heart of the battle 
when they gathered around me. I was a long time hearing 
about war, but I've seen it now, and I'm not the better for 
4 A mythological hero. 



120 An Old Woman's Rtflections 
it until the last day of my life. Musha, isn't the fine strong 
courage God gave to our lads that they stand without fear 
on the plains against those! 0 Mary, wasn't their skin 
black ! You'd think it was down in the bowels of a ship they 
had spent their lives.' 
'Whatever fear you had of them, on my soul you didn't 
forget to notice them well!' 
'Arrah, this and that on me but it wasn't so mucl1 for 
liking them I was peeping at them but for dint of physical 
fear of them. I'd think, when one of them would move, 
that it was with intent to kill me. I'd think all the time the 
metal pistol would be stuck in my heart. Were you afraid, 
Peig ?' 
'I suppose, musha, I wasn't, Nell,' said I. 'What good 
was it for me to be afraid? Fear wouldn't save a person 
from death, as we know.' 
'You are right, Peig, but believe me there were few people 
who weren't afraid.' 
Soon after that, peace came and the terror that wàs on 
people went. 



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 


I am Seeking the Widows' Pension; 
I am in a Motor-Car 


Everyone's story is his own story and Martin's story is the 
money! I was often listening to a rumour that was going 
from mouth to mouth, that there was a pension for widows. 
I often asked people about it but they had no information 
to give me. My heart was gripped but when would I hear 
anything worthwhile. But long as day is, night comes and 
news of the pensions came, too. That's when the old widows 
had the confusion and believe me about it, there were no 
cramps on them. As for myself, I was excited, no wonder. 
But it's very hard for the old women of the Island to go to 
Dunquin because of not having the dry road and it's not 
always the sea is calm. 
Myself and Mary John Michael decided to go to Bally- 
ferriter to get our ages and our marriage ages as soon as 
we'd get a calm day. On the Tuesday morning I just had 
the morning meal on the table when a messenger came from 
Mary. There came such worldly fussing on me that I didn't 
wait to eat a bite only to swallow my cup of tea as a drink. 
I threw off the old clothes and put on clean whole ones; 
and to tell the truth, they weren't half tightened on to me, 
because going down the path I was tightening them. But 
good as was the hurry I made the canoe was afloat before 
me and Mary settled in it. 
'God with my soul,' said she, 'aren't you a long time! 
Or what delayed you?' 
'Ah, let me be, woman, I didn't eat a bite with power of 



122 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


anxiety! Don't you see my boots and I haven't fastened 
them yet. But I can do them here. I have the nice chance 
at them now. Here, let's move, in God's name.' 
Because of the weather being so fine, we were not long 
going to Dunquin. As soon as I stood on the quay I looked 
up at the cliff. I thought it had the height of a mountain. 
I drew a sigh from my heart: 
'0 God of Power, Mary, is it reluctant I am to tackle 
the way up, or where did my strength and agility go? And 
worse than that, I've lost my breath, and I'll never manage 
to get to the top of the cliff.' 
'Is it joking you are?' said Mary, 'anyone who would look 
at you and the flush that's in your cheek he'd swear there 
wasn't a thing in the world wrong with you.' 
'Don't take the book by the cover, Mary,' said I, 'because 
I'm well used to it, the slippery side of me is turned out- 
wards and the crooked side in.' 
'Is it to talk we came here?' said Mary. 'When will \VC 
be moving?' 
'Here it's with you!' said I, and we moved on. You'd 
think Mary was a hare, making her way up and I crawling 
after her and indeed I wouldn't carry a spoonful of wine 
after coming to Cliff Top. I had to sit and rest. 
'We can never walk to Ballyferriter, Mary, if we don't 
get any jaunt,' said I. 'But see, there's a motor-car coming 
from the west. Maybe he'll go north.' 
'There is, indeed,' said Mary, but before the word was 
out of her mouth the motor-car had stopped at the top of 
the cliff, a little way from us. I stood up to go and talk to 
the driver, but with that there was another motor-car 
coming up from the Field of the Wrinkle, putting road- 
dust in the sky. I raised my hand because I had a sort of 
acquaintance with the driver. He stopped the motor-car, 
and beckoned to us to come, and as we know it's on us the 



I am Seeking the Widows' Pension 


12 3 


joy was that he came to us so opportunely. While you'd be 
clapping your two hands together he had swept us on the 
road north. When I got the ease I had plenty of talk with 
the driver. 
'Yes,' said I to him, 'what we hadn't in the beginning of 
our lives we have it at the end of our lives. Isn't it little we 
thought we'd ever be going like this in a motor-car! But 
what would I be talking for? Isn't there many a change in 
the world in the forty-two years since last I went this road? 
At that time I hadn't to be seen but little thatched houses. 
But look, today, there are fine new houses, good enough 
for the palace of the King long ago. The fields themselves 
that were full of boulders and stones, they are smooth level 
ground today with fine fences.' 
'They are, indeed,' said the driver. 'Do you see that 
white house in front of us on the hill?' 
'1 do,' said I. 'Isn't it the fine, airy place it is! Who are 
they who live in that fine house?' 
'That's a Summer house for Nuns, 0 daughter!' 
'Musha, glory to God on high in Heaven!' said I. 'That 
itself is a twist in life! A Nun's house where I remembered 
a miserable little thatched hut to be, and nobody living in 
it but an old Protestant woman called Lizzie Cox. I think 
she was the last of that family to live in the place. She had a 
small pension from the Stranger people and she kept a 
good grip on it until death choked her. But look who's 
living in it today but the godly Christian women-isn't it 
a lovely life we have now compared with that time?' 
The driver stopped the car suddenly. 
'Here, out with ye now!' said he, and he opened the 
door. 
'Will you come out?' said I. 
'I will, without doubt,' said he. 
'What will you be charging us?' said I. 



12 4 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


'I'll take nothing from ye this time, because I was coming 
here, too.' 
'Musha, good never \vent wrong on anyone,' said I, 'but 
all the same, have a drink.' 
'I'll drink a little drop, but I don't usually drink much.' 
'Yes, this much won't kill you, with God's help!' said I. 
and we went into Mr. Long's house. I called a drink then 
for him. When he had drunk it he bade us farewell and 
went away, because his business was elsewhere and he had 
to be moving. 
'I suppose it's this pension that's going on that brought 
ye?' said Mrs. Long, who was standing in the shop. 
'It is, musha,' said Mary, 'and I suppose it's the idle 
journey for us.' 
'Oh! it's not indeed. Isn't it as right for ye to have it as 
anyone? But I think you'll be delayed, because the priest 
is in Dingle, and it will be two o'clock before he comes.' 
'Oh! God with my soul!' said Mary, 'We'll have- the 
night, so, and the crew of the canoe will be waiting for us.' 
'It's ever said that going to the King's house is not the 
same as coming from it,' said I, answering her. 
'1 suppose it's a long time since ye were here,' said Mrs. 
Long. 
'There are forty-two years since I was here,' said I. 'I 
wasn't here since 1 married.' 
She laughed. 
'It's an unbelievable story,' she said. 
'Yes, but it's true,' said I. 'On my soul I don't know 
where the chapel is at all, because there's a great change 
on this place since last 1 was here. I am like Rip since I 
came into this town. I don't recognize anybody and nobody 
recognizes me. But talk won't do us,' said I to Mary, 'come 
on and we'll look for the clerk. If he had everything ready 
we'd have no delay when the priest would come.' 



I am Seeking the Widows' Pension 


12 5 


'That's exactly what ye had better do,' said Mrs. Long, 
and we went out. 
East with us to the chapel and as the luck of life would 
have it, the clerk was standing before us at the gate. 
'God to ye, women of the island,' said he. 'I suppose it 
was the pension that brought ye this way?' 
'It is, indeed,' said I. 
'The devil, but I'm nearly out of my mind with the same 
pension since it was started. I don't like them, the old 
women, running in to me at all times,' said he. 
'Musha, may God have mercy on us!' said I. 'Many a 
place there was one of them in hiding unknown to anybody 
until now. May God put no shake in the hand that invented 
it for them, because they are a long time burdened unknown 
to the world.' 
'You are right in that much,' said the clerk. 'Come on 
into the chapel.' 
We sat in on the seat and it wasn't long until he came 
with his armful of books and sat on the seat nearest to us. 
'Yes,' said he, 'can ye give me any help? This is slow work. 
Let one of ye be praying while the other is answering me.' 
'On my oath, I can't do any praying because I'm anxious, 
but maybe Mary could while I'd be ans\vering. If the work 
were done first we would have plenty of time to pray then,' 
said I. 
'Here's ye to it, then,' said he, and it took a good while 
of the day for him to do his job. When he had everything 
settled he left us there. 
'Ye'll have to wait now until the priest comes,' said he. 
Mary and I spent a nice short while in the chapel, but 
the priest came at last and it was a great relief to us. 
When we came back to Mrs. Long she had a cup of tea 
ready before us, and to tell the truth I had need of it, 
because I didn't wait to eat anything in the morning. 



126 


An Old Woman's Reflections 


'Ye'll be going home now, I suppose,' said she. 
'We will,' said I, 'but we have decided to go to Harbour 
To\vn first to visit the sick woman. We'd have no business 
going home without paying her a visit.' 
'l\1usha, you are right,' said she. 'Wasn't it fatal the way 
it happened to the poor woman? She is badly hurt.' 
'Didn't you ever hear,' said I, 'that providence doesn't 
stop, and since the evening is fine, if we had the motor-car 
we'd pay a little visit down across.' 
'On my soul, musha,' said she, 'it won't be that fine. 
The sky has the appearance of rain.' 
I put my head out the door and the fine wide drops were 
falling down. 
'It's raining already,' said I, 'and we have to go into 
Patrick Bowler's house yet. Farewell and bless you, woman 
of the house.' 
We went out and the rain was falling heavily. Patrick 
was standing in the door before us and he chuckled. 
'I think ye'll have Ballyferriter until morning, women of 
the island,' said he. 'It looks like it will do a good drenching 
of rain. ' 
'Yah! if we have itself:' said I, 'haven't you a long roomy 
house to give us lodging until morning?' 
The weather lightened a little at last and we went to 
where the motor-car was, but we weren't a dozen yards 
from the house when the rain came, and the drop was in 
to the bone on us before we reached Mannion's house. A 
person would think we were two ducks with broken 
backs. 
The Mannion had the motor-car ready to go to Dingle 
and he couldn't make much delay. He said he would bring 
us to Harbour Town, but that we'd have to stay there until 
morning. \Ve had to put our minds at ease; we had no 
second choice. 



I am Seeking the Widows' Pension 


12 7 


When we got to the house the bright welcomes were 
before us. There was no thirst, hunger or cold left on us 
there or lack of entertainment either. 
At ten o'clock in the morning the man of the motor-car 
was before us and while you'd be drinking a cup of tea we 
were at Cliff Top and the canoe had just come to meet us. 
The weather was not altogether too gentle and what with a 
fine blast of wind and sea-swells we were not too easy in 
our minds until we reached the Island. 
But God of Power! After all the hardship and the length 
I had looked forward to the pension, I got no tale or tidings 
of it and I suppose it was the barren hope for me. It's hard 
on poor people to have anything, but as the man said 
long ago: 


A person without store, at a wedding he's not recognized; 
A person without store, his voice is not weighed in sense; 
A person without store, he has no business spending or 
ordering; 
And a person without store, is the butt of life's misfortune. 


That's the same way with me and the pension. But I 
suppose Tim of Dingle is in the first place! 



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 


The Last Chapter 


My spell on this little bench is nearly finished. It's sad and 
low and lonely I am to be parting with it. Long as the day 
is, night comes, and alas, the night is coming for me, too. 
I am parting with you, beautiful little place, sun of my 
life. Other people will have your pleasure in future, but I'll 
be far away from you in a kingdom I don't know. Big Peig, 
as the children call me, will be there no more, but maybe a 
better woman would. But she won't have as much pleasure 
as I had, because great as was my sorrow and heart- 
torment, God of Glory and His Blessed Mother helped me. 
I was often standing here studying the works of the Creator 
and tasting His royal sweetness in my heart. Everything He 
created was a consolation to me, even unto the grief itself, 
it would make me think deeper. I thought there was nothing 
in the things of this life but poverty-this place full today 
and empty tomorrow-hadn't I got it to be seen, clearly. 
rfhe people I knew in my youth, it was often they had the 
stone in the gauntlet for each other. They were strong, 
courageous, strong-worded, but they all fell, they were 
cleared out of the world. It was the same do the people who 
were there before them got, and may God have mercy on 
us, where is their work today? Other people to be in their 
place, without the slightest thought for them. I think every- 
thing is folly except for loving God! 
I am now at tight grips with the years, and many a thing 
I saw. Everything I was interested in I didn't let it astray. 
Someone else will have pastime out of my ,vork when I'm 
gone on the way of truth. A person here and a person there 



The Last Chapter 


12 9 


will say, maybe, 'Who was that Peig Sayers?' but poor Peig 
will be the length of their shout from them. This green 
bench where she used to do the studying will be a domicile 
for the birds of the wilderness, and the little house where 
she used to eat and drink, it's unlikely there'll be a trace 
of it there. 
These thoughts appearing in my heart today are lonely. 
They are not pleasant for me but I can't help them. Here 
they are towards me in their thousands; they are like 
soldiers. As I scatter them, they come together again. It's 
no good for me to be at them. They have beaten me. My 
blessing and the blessing of God be with Youth; and my 
advice to everyone is to borrow from this life, because a 
spool is no faster turning than it. My life is spent, as a 
candle, and my hope is up every day that I'll be called 
into the eternal kingdom. 
o God who is in Heaven, my trust and my hope is fully 
in you! May you guide me on this long road I have 
not travelled before! It's often during my life you helped me. 
Well I know your holy help, because I was often held by 
sorrow, with no escape. When the need was highest, it was 
then you would lay your merciful eye on me, and a light 
like the shining of the sun would come on my worried mind. 
The clouds of sorrow \vould be gone '\vithout trace; in place 
there would be some spiritual joy whose sweetness I cannot 
describe here. 
But I have this much to say, that I had good neighbours. 
We helped each other and lived in the shelter of each other. 
Everything that was coming dark upon us, we would dis- 
close it to each other, and that would give us consolation of 
mind. Friendship was the fastest root in our hearts. 
It was like a little rose in the wilderness I grew up; with- 
out for company only those gems that God of Glory created, 
eternal praise to Him! Every early morning in the summer 



130 An Old Woman's Reflections 
when the sun would show its face up over the top of Eagle 
Mountain I was often looking at it and at the same time 
making wonder of the colours in the sky around us. I 
remember well that there used to be little yellow, golden 
rays as slender roads coming to me from the top of the 
mountain, and that the mountain used to be red and a big 
belt of every colour, between white, yellow and black, 
around the sky and every colour giving its own appearance 
on the great, ,vet sea. I think, there was welcome in the 
heart of every creature for the sparkling of the morning. 
There are people and they think that this island is a 
lonely, airy place. That is true for them, but the peace of 
the Lord is in it. I am living in it for more than forty years, 
and I didn't see two of the neighbours fighting in it yet. 
It was like honey for my poor tormented heart to rise up 
on the shoulder of the mountain footing the turf or gathering 
the sods on each other. Very often I'd throw myself back 
in the green heather, resting. It wasn't for bone-Iaziness_ I'd 
do it, but for the beauty of the hills and the rumble of the 
waves that would be grieving down from me, in dark caves 
where the seals of the sea lived-those and the blue sky 
without a cloud travelling it, over me-it was those made 
me do it, because those were the pictures most pleasant to 
my heart, and it's those I was most used to. 
A person would say, maybe, that it was a simple life we 
were living, but nobody would say that our life was com- 
fortable. Our own hardships followed us. It's often we were 
in a way to go with fear and fright, because when winter 
came it wasn't its habit to come gentle and kind. The great 
sea was coming on top of us and the strong force of the 
wind helping it. We had but to send our prayer sincerely to 
God that nobody would be taken sick or ill. We had our 
own charge of that because there wasn't a priest or doctor 
near us without going across the little strait and the little 



The Last Chapter 


13 1 


strait was up to three miles in length. But God was in favour 
with us, eternal praise to Him! For with my memory 
nobody died without the priest in winter-time. 
Farewell to the things of this life now, and especially to 
the pleasant, gay time I have spent here. I'm afraid I'll do 
no more \vork in future for the language of the superior 
men, but I have done a person's share, maybe. I would do 
as much more, and have the heart for it, but the time 
is spent. 
Pray for me, friends and dear people, that God will give 
me help for the long road! 





DATE DUE 


E-
 9 ft 'L-:l.- 
-'I . 
," 
 .., 
, ." 

 . 
.... .... 
I . 



 
. 

 
I 
GAYLORD I PRINTED IN U. S.A. 



 


Clothel 


arri! VaJa.c 

 I %
)) 
'!t:J.'El e 8- ij 

/aske 

Soun
 

) 
 
'(.I'
 
') r -1f"e 


t@f
.J 

.
 


@) 
Foze 
a,Rocks 

 


- -
) 

a.t So 

 \ Ú'1O' 
In;Sh 
 .
 
 
8 " ,,\, 
na- ro 
) I í :Sou(Jd 
Na rr 
 
\
 Inish-vickilla.un 

 .... '1/) 
-
Thunder 
Rock 



.
 
 
.(': 
e" 
e..\ 
 ...' 
,... ''''..... 
. 
 'II' " 
\' " 

'(-
.d{
 - . 5 

 'l
 ec\:,").Ot\ 
. l' e1..g r ef 1- 
5, '5 
S gyer: ð. \tt oma..11 
Q1J 

 
; 


- 
-- 

. 
/1 .,.,., O ffil l 
3 5132 00256 14 13 i= :=- Branp,
,,, 
University of the P ac" 
 / ' c L, ' b fj :::
41Í 1 ' {{t\
if
: 
.. "rary. rr"
/IJ I 
 \\' l l'-- 
".., ':;:..." 'If(.- 
. -:,./ 

" f iJfl 11111 :::= .--: 


?/'/I U." \ , 
<= 

/!f:.: .&\
\
?
 
ï
. \\

3"..:? 1f11
' 
1)l'. 


;i31,q{ll,lhll 
99
 
iì.ff

)
!\
 
-aÓ;' 1/ /lI!!. o_::-::: G_"" ,
 
p . .' · - =:-:::; \WI
Þ. 
2 
 __ ::::::::-

 
I'
.......-; 
S 'I ' 


 
 
J &:" 
.::::-
 
I ,;,
 . 
:'
/.íl{2: ,'; 
.===3/(/l('
-;;:
 " \' 

-==-11.1I! -=-
".." i\ 
;'1IH fl ::}ffi;
:\
 
. " .
 

 ( "
.\\
 . 
ft n '. ?
'I.I
 \ .J J 1\ \ .
 
Î. ....t..U -':: 
 0 . . 

 
-? ,\\\: Yo 

,,,,, \
,'\ ílt, 

 \\
, . 
. \ \ \ \' ' 



li.1 NGl1
 

r
...
 

"/ .::-.;: 
' 
' 
 -"':.--.- I ,\\, 
, - .r/II 


\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
=\ 
'
 
 

...., 
.....:>-- 

.
 
''I: (I 
1, , 1 \ 
'Ih\ .. 
,,' t 

RH , 
'-/f
 
,
O
. 
.-... . 
.-:;;:: . 

"
'M 
' 

 :"'1 

..
.:::..'-
, " 

.." 
íU
 


a;
 
:.
 ," \" ''it\
 
:.::: ' ,, \ . \ ' , \ ' \ \; 
'
, '\. \ 
ç Ú\\'\\':III\\ 
. ,I \ \\\..\' 1\\ 
'\ \ \ \ \ \ 'r
, I 
\ ,\
. 

 
:::.-- 


S
ers, Fei
 r

lec to
s 
01 C' t'lT("m
"1 S 


DA 
can 
B65 
527 


- 
",--- 


115915 




c 


m 


." 


C) 


::E: 


- 


c.. 



 


....- 


3: 


z 



411 


. 


. 


.. 


